Mitsawoket, A Native American Community in 17th Century Delaware
&nbsp;
Heite
Consulting's Reports
CONTENTS
1.
Delaware's Invisible Indians,
part I&nbsp;&nbsp; by Dr. Louise Heite
2. Delaware's Invisible Indians,
part II by Edward Heite
3. Searching for Invisible
Indians by Edward Heite
4.
Bloomsbury by Edward
Heite
5.
Mitsawoket,
the Community on Pumpkin Neck by Edward Heite
6.
Biographical
Directory by Edward Heite
7.
References
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Delaware's
Invisible Indians, part I
&nbsp;
Introduction
and statement of historical problem
&nbsp;
Dr.
Louise Heite
Heite Consulting
Camden DE 19934
Ladies
and Gentlemen:
It
is indeed a privilege to be here before you today, and I thank the
D.H.C.A. for giving us the opportunity to share this research with
so many people.
The
research project in which my husband and I are involved came about
almost by accident. About twelve years ago we received a contract
for an extremely ordinary archaeological survey, part of the highway
planning process. The bit of land in question was the original tract
which nestles into the northwest corner of the junction of St. Jones
River and Mudstone Branch, and bounded today by Salisbury and Denney's
Roads.
As
I was the person in our firm who did not have a project currently
on my desk, it became my job to handle this research. Besides some
rather ordinary archaeological survey, I did a pretty thorough documentary
history of this plot, and of the people who lived on it. Jolley's
Neck, as the property was called, was the home of William Handsor,
a prosperous farmer who for all intents and purposes was exactly
like all the other prosperous farmers who settled on fertile land
at or near the headwaters of Kent County's navigable streams in
the early years of the eighteenth century. As I began this research,
I had absolutely no indication that Handsor was in any way different
or unlike his neighbors.
It
was not until I ran the successions to the property of his children
and grandchildren that I realized that this piece of land represented
a completely different historical dynamic than the one I had originally
thought I was dealing with. I was astounded to find that Handsor's
family split in the second generation into two branches. One, apparently
white, disappeared from our study only because the daughter married
into a neighboring family of mill owners, somewhat inconveniently
named Miller, and documented to be German. But later, the man she
married was recorded as a "free person of." This branch moved off
the property, while the descendants of the other branch stayed on
the property, and were identified as mulatto or free persons of
color in the latter part of the eighteenth century.
This
was a real surprise. Racial mixing has always occurred, but it is
difficult to document at such an early period. Our mythology, and
to a large degree, our truth, is that it was considered to be a
very negative behavior (forgive the jargon) in earlier times. So,
of course, I began to explore this family and its relationship to
its land much more closely. I wondered what on earth could have
prompted this apparent mixing: passion, crime, great liberality,
or perhaps some kind of idiocy? Did I have the makings of an eighteenth-century
soap opera here in my hot little hands?
But
another question kept nagging me. Who kept the records? Perhaps
nothing was going on, and perhaps the phenomenon I was witnessing
in the records was an artifact not of the deeds and events described,
but of the description itself.
A
document is evidence only of itself. Those who keep Documents document
what they see, and they document the information they need. When
a historian approaches the records it is imperative that he or she
put that principle in the forefront. Nobody kept records to make
the doing of history easier for the historian. They kept records
of the phenomena that mattered to the society in which they lived.
Although documents tell us wonderful things, they almost always
only tell us about the society which the record-keeper lived in.
While dealing with marginal groups, the documents impose the perceptions
of the dominant society upon what might well be an altogether different
reality within the minority society.
So,
as a double-check on the apparent picture of a family which split
according to racial alliance of the children, I decided to consciously
question the assumptions of the record-keeper. What did the tax
collector or the writer of deeds see when he wrote down names, and
how did that compare with the reality, and the unrecorded identity
of the people being recorded? Would they have written the same as
the records that were taken down?
A
small digression: the history of racial relations in America is
full of sorrow and sadness, prejudice, and unfairness. In the course
of this presentation, Ned and I must necessarily discuss matters
that may be irritating or upsetting to some listeners, and to describe
past prejudices which are offensive and anathema to all of us. That
is the nature of history, and we must look at the ugly along with
the beautiful if we are to appreciate its wholeness, and eventually
to forgive our forebears. That must not be taken as evidence that
we share these old prejudices, or that we condone the behavior of
our ancestors. But sweeping these behaviors under the rug will not
change the past, and only understanding the past will allow us to
remedy and avoid its mistakes.
There
are a number of studies that explore the growth of racial prejudice
in America, which are in total rather contradictory about the nature
of that prejudice at the time of contact. It is perhaps enough to
call the settlers naive, and to point out that color prejudice has
a long, long history in European culture in general. Native American
culture was totally alien to European expectations, and I am sure
vice versa. Nearly everything we know about Native American society
at the time of contact with the Europeans is filtered through European
eyes, and translated into European concepts. And at all periods,
in all places, the dominant culture tried to shoehorn Native American
behavior and customs into some concept that they, the dominants,
could understand. Thus developed the land grabs, the early and unsuccessful
attempts at enslavement, and hostage-taking disguised as Europeanization
and Christianization.
Some Natives and some Colonists got on very well, This is especially
true of relations between Native Americans and Continental Europeans.
French, Dutch, and Swedes all had good relations with the Indians,
even at the times when Native Americans were actively engaged in
warfare with the English in New England and Virginia. The so-called
"Long Finn" who fomented a rebellion among the Swedes, hid and recruited
among the Native community, probably the Lenape or the Minquas,
in the seventeenth century, approximately concurrently with King
Philip's War in New England. The Nanticokes apparently had a friendly
relationship with the Mennonites who settled in the area inland
from Lewes, and who may have in fact "gone native" during the Anglo-Dutch
Wars and the years on either side of it, in which Maryland was trying
very hard to establish hegemony over the entire Delmarva Peninsula.
The
final attempt of Continental Europeans and Native Americans to expel
the English took the form of the French and Indian War, which marks,
for all intents and purposes, the functional end of Native Americans
as active players in the area east of the Appalachians. Our common
cultural mythology is drawn from James Fenimore Cooper, whose Chingachcook
calls himself "the Last of the Mohicans" &#151; despite the fact
that there are several thousand Mohicans living today in New York.
Conceptually, and mythologically, Chingachcook was the end of a
long line.
The
relationship of English and Anglicized Americans with persons of
color took another, related but separate, turn during the seventeenth
century as well, as race-based chattel slavery grew quickly out
of the old customs of indenture and bondage. The original Black
settlers were in fact no more slaves than the common indentured
Englishman, but very quickly their color and their different culture
branded them, and left them unable to claim the freedom due them
under the law. Color prejudice and chattel slavery married, and
produced an economic system as firmly bound to human bondage as
the Medieval feudalism from which it ultimately derived.
Concurrent
with the French and Indian War, but unrelated to it, one can see
the beginnings of changes in the nature of American race relations.
On the one hand, there was a hardening of attitudes towards Blacks,
and towards those of mixed Black and other parentage. On the other
hand, there was a new and growing interest in the abolition of human
slavery, particularly among the Quakers of the Middle Colonies.
On a third hand, the economic importance of slavery made it almost
inevitable that those with vested interests would seek to extend
the status of slave as far down the family tree as possible. Thus,
early on, any taint of Black blood was taken as proof of slavery.
And in this whole mix, one must also acknowledge that at least early
on, runaway slaves and indentured servants alike found homes among
the Native population. The relative similarity of hunting and subsistence
agriculture in the African and Native American cultures must have
made it particularly easy for African-born runaways to slide into
Native society. But the records of both Virginia and New England
are also full of accounts of white runaways said to have "gone to
the Indians."
The
Revolution, with its talk of liberty and equality, caused some unrest
among the slave populations, who justifiably hoped that the rhetoric
might extend to them. Runaway slaves and indentured servants found
the social turmoil and physical mobility at the end of the Revolution
to be an ideal cover. Incidents of running away became very common
for a few years during the 1780's. Small slave rebellions also began
around the end of the Revolution and occurred with increasing frequency
until Nat Turner's unsuccessful rebellion in Virginia in 1830.
Now,
let's review. By the end of the eighteenth century, there was an
idea among the white population that the Indians were virtually
gone from the original Colonies, particularly in the coastal areas.
There was a hardening of slave laws, partly in reaction to the increasing
incidents of runaways and rebellions. It became increasingly important
to document race, as abolitionists were putting a lot of pressure
on slaveowners to free their slaves.
As
these factors came together, the perceptions of white record-keepers
changed. Where they had once seen simply farmers and neighbors,
they began to see people of color. What color was often in doubt,
as certain families who had never been slaves were also obviously
too brown, too exotic, and somehow too different, to be any more
just like the rest of the neighbors. As law and expectation began
to demand the classification of these people by race, record-keepers
grasped at whatever terminology their society and their prejudices
allowed. As the record-keepers assumed that the Indians had all
"gone west" there had to be a category for these people. The category
of convenience was "free mulatto." Slightly more careful record-keepers
used the alternative term, "free person of color" when classifying.
But classify they did, and that classification had a virulent effect
on the future of the undocumented, settled Indians.
Now
I shall turn the platform over to Ned, who will describe in some
detail the evidence which has amassed over the last decade or so
that the so-called Moors are the descendants of the settled Indians
of Delaware. And as you listen you might ponder the unanswerable:
What was it that allowed these people to settle in among their European
neighbors &#151; exceptional adaptability, open-mindedness, or some
event of Native American politics during the colonial period, which
we may never recover no matter how far and how hard we look.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Delaware's
Invisible Indians, part II
&nbsp;
Research
and research findings
&nbsp;
Edward
Heite (1937 - 2005)
Heite Consulting
Camden DE 19934
&nbsp;
This
paper reflects inquiries into the history of a local Native American
remnant population often misnamed "moors" historically centered
around the town of Cheswold (formerly Moortown) in Little Creek
and Duck Creek hundreds of Kent County.
From
the end of the seventeenth century, until the last decades of the
nineteenth century, no Native Americans were legally recognized
in Kent County.
Census,
tax, and school records contain no record of any race other than
black or white during that period. What happened to Kent County's
original Indian population? Why were the local Indians invisible
for more than 200 years? The history of "invisible" Indians, and
the context in which they lived, is essential to an understanding
of today's Kent County Indian population.
During
the eighteenth century, a free person's race was seldom if ever
reflected in the public records. Not until the end of that century
do we find any regular system of designating free people according
to their race. This official absence of references to race during
the eighteenth century has complicated the historian's task of making
a racial or cultural identification.
During
the decades immediately after the American Revolution, the economic,
legal, and social status of the Native American community was slipping
from a largely undifferentiated white or "not black" to a status
called "mulatto" that was indistinguishable in the public record
from the status of free Negroes. Partly as a consequence of this
change in designation, the people became poorer, less literate,
and almost invisible.
Isolate
Groups = Indians?
Racially
ambiguous communities, sometimes collectively called isolates or
tri-racial isolates, are found throughout the United States, but
they are best known in the upper South. These groups frequently
are self-defined and have maintained a separate identity for centuries.
As
details have fallen together, it has become obvious that the isolate
groups are, in fact, Native American remnant communities that have
remained outside the official system of recognized tribes.
Removals
The
concept of a tribe was fostered by the European colonizers, who
needed a Native American organization to mirror their own national
bodies. Without tribes, there could be no negotiations between sovereign
nations. Thus the modern idea of an organized Indian nation is largely
a creature of European society, rather than a natural development
of native culture.
Almost immediately after the beginning of colonization, the European
and Native communities recognized the need to keep space between
themselves.
By
about 1718, Southern Maryland Piscataway had established Conoy Town
on the Susque-hanna in Pennsylvania, near the present Bainbridge
as a refuge from the advancing frontier. To this location came other
Piscataway from the present Washington metropolitan area, as well
as other Maryland Indians. By 1742, there is mention of Nanticokes
among them.
In the next year the Conoy and the Nanticoke moved to the mouth
of the Juniata, following advice from the Iroquois with whom they
had become associated. By 1753, the Nanticoke and Piscataway were
a single people. During the Revolution, 120 Nanticoke and 30 Piscataway
took refuge at Fort Niagara. Thereafter some went to Canada, while
others left to join the Lenape on the trek that eventually took
them to Oklahoma.
A native community remained here in Delaware, outside the organized
tribal group that moved to the west. Those who stayed behind melted
into the dominant culture, but they retained ties with the emigrants,
sometimes for generations.
Some
Delaware community members evidently retained connections with the
emigrants. In 1892, a Philadelphia newspaper reported that a man
of the Cheswold community born at Cheswold in 1811 had lived as
a young man among the Lenape emigrant group in Indiana. He claimed
to be a full-blooded Indian from the Nanticoke area of Sussex County,
nearly forty years after Lydia Clark had testified under oath in
court that none had survived except herself.
Most of the surviving Native Americans along the eastern seaboard
live outside the "recognized" or "reservation" groups. More than
a hundred identifiable tribal groups are not recognized by the Department
of the Interior. Without government recognition, tribal groups have
had little success in asserting their Indian identity. Ironically,
the "non-reservation" Indians, descendants of "removed" tribes along
the east coast, probably number more than 115,000.
Indians in the east are here because their ancestors consciously
renounced their native culture. During the removal period, Indians
who chose to retain their traditional way of life were packed off.
Those who chose to stay in their home territories adopted European
ways as quickly and completely as possible. Rather than live on
tribal reservations, they acquired property in the European system,
and became landowners indistinguishable on the record from their
white neighbors.
Because it was not prudent to proclaim Indian identity, remnants
allowed themselves to be called "mulatto" or even "negro," but more
often "colored." Until 1830, free nonwhite communities were tolerated
or ignored in most localities by the dominant European culture.
The
late John Witthoft suggested that, in the Penn colonies, native
groups survived on the personal manors of the Proprietors, which
were effectively baronial estates exempt from local political forces.
There was a manor, called Frieth, on the upper reaches of Duck Creek,
in Kent County, Delaware, immediately northwest of the area where
the progenitors of the Cheswold community lived during the eighteenth
century. This tantalizing clue deserves to be followed.
Definition
of isolate groups
Racial
definition is a relatively new phenomenon in American law. During
the entire first half of European-American history, there was little
or no incentive to legally define the precise racial origin of a
person who was otherwise culturally indistinguishable from the European-American
community. Before the American Revolution, only Virginia and North
Carolina legally defined race in terms of ancestry.
A Virginia law of 1705 defined the child of an Indian as a mulatto,
but it stated that the child, grandchild, and great-grandchild of
a Negro would be a mulatto. For Indian/white unions, the taint of
mulatto status would disappear when the issue of such a union married
a white person. For Negro/white unions, the taint was effectively
permanent. As long as the progeny of Indian/white unions mated among
themselves, Virginia law would identify the offspring as mulatto,
unless they lived on a reservation. Maryland had a similar definition,
but it was not explicitly stated. This universally applied mulatto
label caused the Indians to disappear officially from the Delmarva
Peninsula.
The
Maryland state historic preservation plan assumes that Native Americans
ceased to exist in the colony at some time. A research questions
in the plan is, "Why did indigenous Native American populations
largely disappear from Maryland after European settlement began?"
A recent state-sponsored study of "free blacks" in the Eastern Shore
of Maryland included documented Indians, including the Puckham and
the Cambridge families, among the black population, on the basis
of their being described as "mulatto" in the public records, even
though the evidence overwhelmingly points to their being Indians.
Public
policy in Maryland and most of the southeastern states was essentially
biracial. One was either white or nonwhite, which meant black.
Between the Revolution and the Civil War, racial definitions became
more detailed and more important, as legal restrictions on non-whites
became progressively more oppressive. Those who were defined as
Negroes or mulattos found their civil rights eroded, while Indians
were forced off their land and into the west. Racial definition
became a matter of survival. After 1831, in response to the perceived
threat of the Nat Turner rebellion, the slave states, including
Delaware, passed restrictive laws forbidding mulattos and blacks
to own arms, to congregate, or even to attend church, except under
white supervision.
Legally many attempts at defining race are obsolete, because race
no longer defines a person's access to voting, schooling, marriage
partner, or public facilities. Released from the specter of legal
repercussions, researchers can now ask questions that previously
were taboo, sometimes even inside the community.
The
first hurdle facing researchers is the issue of historical, legal,
and documentary ambiguity. Racial isolate groups share a lack of
documentary history, a legendary past that is impossible to verify,
and a tradition of reticence about their true origins. All these
problems will confront anyone studying the Kent County community.
The name "moor" is not particularly favored by the community it
designates, since it denotes North African or Iberian origins for
people who consider themselves Native Americans. Nonetheless, the
name has existed for more than a century, and must be confronted
historically.
The
Cheswold Enclave
A separate identity for the Kent County community can be documented
genealogically as early as the first half of the eighteenth century,
when free persons were not customarily identified by race in the
public record. Members of the group were marrying among themselves
during the first identifiable generation around 1720. Separate group
identity is implied by the genealogical facts, but not explicitly
stated on the official record, during most of the eighteenth century.
Scharf's 1888 History of Delaware states that the group claimed
that their community began about 1710, maintaining a separate society
from the start. Historians have never definitively established the
origins of the community, but the date 1710 is not without some
justification.
Weslager
traced the Hansor family to Aminidab, son of Aminidab and Rose Hansor,
born in 1688. In 1716, a William Handsor owned land in Indian River
Hundred, and was listed as white, or at least not black. The elder
Aminidab Hansor is said to have been the illegitimate son of Mary
Vincent, the English wife of John Okey of Mulatto Hall and a servant
called Aminidab "Haw" of Nandua Creek, Virginia.
William
Hansor typifies the founding Cheswold generation. He patented Jolley's
Neck, on Chance's Branch of St. Jones River, in 1737. When he died
in 1768, he left effects that speak of a decidedly prosperous life,
including a sword, a fiddle, shoemaker tools, and carpentry tools.
His children and grandchildren intermarried with the same families
that constitute the community today.
The
other "core" families appear in the Kent County records at about
the same time, about a generation after the same names appear in
Sussex County documents. Where their origins can be traced, each
original family can be identified as having family ties among the
Indian River community in Sussex. Even there, less than a third
of the community surnames appear in the court records before 1710.
When racial labels began to appear consistently in the public record,
early in the nineteenth century, members of the community were haphazardly
assigned such labels as "mulattos" or "free persons of color" and
sometimes "Negroes." The same individual might be found with all
three labels. In large part, racial designation depended upon wealth.
A wealthy Indian might be described as white, while his dirt-poor
cousin might be described as a Negro. If he could read and write,
he was more likely to be described as white or mulatto. It is useful
to consider these labels, remembering that they reflect the bias
of the observer.
Although
it today is taken to mean mixed black and white, the word "mulatto"
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries generally applied to
anyone with dark skin who was not a Negro. In the West Indies, the
term was applied to mixed black-Indian individuals. Another meaning
was a person who was "half-Christian," born of a union between a
Spaniard and a non-Christian. In one 1709 example, cited in the
Oxford English Dictionary, a person was described as both a mulatto
and an Indian. Definitions in Delaware official documents were no
more precise.
The
Pennsylvania Assembly set terms of service for [white] indentured
servants whose indentures could not be found. Those who came into
the colony without papers were presumed to serve five years if they
were between seventeen and twenty-two years old [later changed to
sixteen and twenty-one] , or until the age of twenty-two if they
were under seventeen. The law, which was at first disallowed by
the Crown, would not apply to Africans. A taint of African blood
would therefore significantly alter a servant's status. In this
regard, "mulatto" status was legally independent of any African
connection, as the case of Jacob Frederick illustrates.
In June, 1698, a "Molattoe Boy" named Jacob Frederick complained
to the Sussex court that "hee Came Not of nigroe Parentage." Frederick
argued that he had been bound as an apprentice for a term, and could
not be held as a slave for life under Delaware law. He succeeded
in his plea, but in 1704 he was again in court, sentenced to twenty
lashes and six weeks of additional service to his mistress for beating
John Morgan. Frederick was a witness in 1709 for the defense when
Samuel Dickinson was accused of horse stealing.
The
1800 manuscript census is the oldest official extant documentation
of an attempt (the 1790 census being lost) to define everyone in
Delaware by race. Three categories of nonwhite people were identified:
Indians not taxed, free colored persons, and slaves. In each hundred,
the local census taker applied his own system. The census was tallied
differently in each county, too. In Sussex County, the tally contains
a list at the end of each hundred list titled "Free Negroes & Mulattos
& C," while in Kent, the letter "N" was placed after certain names.
If anyone was considered to be an Indian, he was not to be listed.
The results were ambiguous and confusing to the point where the
1800 census serves only to cloud the issue.
The ambiguity is well illustrated by the cases of Elizabeth LaCount
and Mary Durham. Mary, widow of Isaiah Durham, is listed in the
1800 census of Little Creek Hundred with the letter "N" after her
name, with only free persons of color in her household. When she
married John Sisco, also listed as "N" in the census, her surety
on the administration of Isaiah's estate, a white man, demanded
to be released from his bond because she had married a mulatto!
Clearly Mary was perceived by a white neighbor as belonging to a
"superior" racial group, above the mulatto Sisco, while in another
record both are described as negroes. In the 1800 census, Isaiah's
brother William Durham is listed as white, or at least not nonwhite.
Moreover, they both were cousins of John Sisco. William Durham's
sisters married members of the inter-related Sisco, Conselor, and
LaCount families.
Elizabeth LaCount is listed without the "N" after her name in the
Duck Creek census, but with only free persons of color in her household.
Samuel LaCount appears as white in the Mispillion Hundred census
of 1800. Thomas LaCount married Letitia Durham, sister of the allegedly
not nonwhite William, in 1789.
The
progenitors of the community appeared in the Kent County records
without racial identification, generally literate and financially
well off, early in the eighteenth century. Within the next few generations,
their descendants declined in wealth and status. Perhaps most significant
was the decline in literacy among the community. Male literacy was
a powerful indicator of a household's economic prospects. In those
days before free public education, literacy was a commodity that
required disposable income and access to schools. A poor family
in the backwoods, unable to reach or afford access to private schools,
had few prospects of improvement.
When Delaware began offering free public education in 1829, it was
reserved for the white population. Benjamin Tharp was engaged to
set up the districts, and his field notes have survived at the Delaware
Archives. Tharp counted the white households and allocated them
to districts for tax and school attendance purposes. No black households
were counted, and neither were the Native families. Creation of
a public school system resulted in a white monopoly, while private
schools were dissolved or absorbed. Private academies in Dover,
Camden, Newark, Middletown and other towns became public schools
with a strict color line. Private education, in which nonwhites
might have found a place, shriveled away as free public education
matured.
After
the Civil War, Delaware reluctantly instituted free public education
for nonwhites on the biracial model, which excluded the possibility
of a third racial school system. A few "moor" or "Indian" schools
eventually were established within the state system, but only at
the elementary level. Some went without education rather than attend
segregated schools; others moved away to less segregated states,
or sent their children to schools in unsegregated jurisdictions.
Relationships
Among Groups
"Isolate"
groups have not been isolated from one another. Circumstantial and
anecdotal evidence points to a long interrelationship among the
various groups over centuries. Some migrations can be traced in
the genealogical record, connecting Native American communities
across the Delmarva Peninsula and beyond.
As the stigma of "inferior" racial status has waned, and concurrently
Indian ethnic pride has increased, there has been considerable genealogical
work directed toward identifying the Native American remnant groups.
Most recently, tenuous claims to tribal status have been advanced
by groups hoping to cash in on federal laws permitting reservation
gambling casinos. The gaming phenomenon has not touched Delaware,
but native self-awareness flourishes on its own.
Sussex
County Nanticoke
One
such self-defined group is today's Sussex County Nanticoke organization.
Even though the original Nanticoke tribe of Sussex County is said
to have emigrated to Pennsylvania and eventually to Canada, a remnant
group claims to be a branch that is still in place on Nanticoke
ancestral ground. These people are historically and genealogically
identical to the Kent County remnant around Cheswold who choose
to call themselves Lenape.
The
Nanticoke during the seventeenth century were a powerful tribe,
who received tribute from communities as far afield as Northampton
County, Virginia. In times of unrest, they appear to have been a
magnet for refugees and malcontents of all races from other parts
of Delmarva.
Maryland
colonial authorities established reservations in the present western
Sussex County, Delaware, and nearby Dorchester County, Maryland.
Nanticoke and Choptank people complained that these reservations
did not actually protect them against encroachment from land seekers
and wandering livestock. Eventually the friction became too great;
seasonal subsistence migrations were not compatible with the more
sedentary European ideas of land ownership and subsistence.
Faced
with further restrictions on their traditional subsistence activities,
many of the Nanticokes decided to move north to the Pennsylvania
and New York frontier. Eventually a Nanticoke remnant settled among
the Six Nations in Canada, where they remain.
Frank Speck, an anthropologist who studied the Nanticoke in Delaware
and Canada, concluded that in 1748, when the Nanticoke emigrated,
they left behind some of their people in Delaware. He identified
the Sussex County remnant as an authentic Nanticoke community, even
though their documented connection with today's Canadian Nanticoke
tribe is tenuous. Only one family name is found both among the remnant
groups in Delaware and the emigrant community.
In
April 1762, Maryland officials reported that about 120 Indians still
lived on reservations. These people, almost certainly Nanticokes,
reportedly lived in good relations with their European-American
neighbors, and no longer traded with other Indians. Soon they would
be completely forgotten by government officials.
Attempts
to regain recognition as Indians suffered a serious setback in 1855,
when Levin Sockum sold powder and shot to his son-in-law Isaac Harmon.
Sockum was charged with violating a law that forbade supplying firearms
to Negroes and mulattos. Harmon and Sockum both denied any Negro
ancestry.
The charges may have been politically motivated, since the two men
were the wealthiest members of their community, and among the largest
landowners in Indian River Hundred. They eventually came to own
the area now occupied by the core of the Nanticoke community.
A
relative of the two men, Lydia Clark, claimed to be the last full-blooded
Nanticoke. She testified that Harmon's ancestor was an enslaved
African who had married his white mistress. The half-breed offspring
of this union, Lydia Clark testified, had intermarried with some
of the remaining Nanticoke. As a result of her testimony, the "moor"
and "Nanticoke" communities were subjected to all the restrictions
imposed on blacks until the end of segregation.
Judge
George Purnell Fisher, who as a young man prosecuted Harman and
Sockum, wrote an article titled "The So-Called Moors of Delaware,"
for a newspaper in 1895, which was reprinted by the Public Archives
Commission, of which his granddaughter was chairman, in 1929. This
article supported the Lydia Clark testimony of a tri-racial origin,
even though Fisher declared from his own observation that Harmon
was "a young man, apparently about five and twenty years of age,
of perfect Caucasian features, dark chestnut brown hair, rosy cheeks
and hazel eyes; and by odds the handsomest man in the court room,
and yet he was alleged to be a mulatto."
Judge Fisher described Noke Norwood, an old man who had lived north
of Lewes during the third decade of the nineteenth century, as "a
dark copper-colored man, about six feet and a half in height, of
splendid proportions, perfectly straight black hair (though at least
75 years old), black eyes and high cheek bones." This "Noke" Norwood
may have been Noble Norwood, who is listed in the 1800 census of
Indian River Hundred as having three "colored" persons in his household.
Northampton
County, Virginia
Racial
segregation and legal nuances of race played a major role in the
history of minority populations in Northampton County, Virginia.
Virginia law, beginning in 1705, defined a person's racial status
in terms of African admixture. After 1873, Virginia law defined
anyone with Negro blood as "colored," and declared that Indian status
could not be extended to colored persons. As late as 1975, any taint
of Negro blood was enough to classify a person as "colored," except
Indians living on the Pamunkey and Mattaponi reservations, who could
have as much admixture as one Negro great-grandparent.
Northampton is the southerly of the two Virginia counties on the
Eastern Shore. Its racial history is complicated, but has been painted
in broad characterizations. Early in the nineteenth century, politicians
were circulating claims that the Indian blood had dissolved into
the black population. This argument was politically necessary in
order to force the dissolution of the local Indian reservation,
but it has been repeated uncritically by historians for two centuries.
Ralph
Whitelaw, the historian of land in the Eastern Shore counties, concludes
for example, that "Today, their blood remains only as a mixture
with that of the Negro race." This statement still is repeated by
historical researchers as a cultural and racial epitaph for the
Indians of the Eastern Shore of Virginia.
During
the seventeenth century, there were families identified as Negro
whose backgrounds and surnames appear to indicate Iberian cultural,
if not racial, origins. Among these "Negro" families were people
named Rodriggus (Driggus or Drighouse), Ferdinando, and Francisco
(Sisco), as well as such non-Iberian names as Payne and Harman.
The possibly Portuguese surnames have been interpreted to indicate
a Dutch connection, since the Dutch were contending with the Portuguese
in Brazil and Angola.
All
three races lived intimately together, both inside and outside of
wedlock, during the seventeenth century in Virginia's Eastern Shore.
White servant women not infrequently married or bore children by
fellow servants of other races during the seventeenth century.
In 1640 a group of Indians on the Eastern Shore of Virginia were
given a 650-acre reservation by the colonial government as a reservation.
The
Gingaskin tribe of Indians dwindled and became destitute. Their
neighbors considered them a nuisance, and charged that they had
become mixed with the local black population. Trustees were appointed
to protect them, and finally in 1786 the tribe petitioned the Virginia
legislature for relief against encroachments. In 1792, the Virginia
General Assembly ordered the Indian town land to be divided among
surviving members of the tribe. This was finally accomplished in
1813, after a second law was passed. The 690-acre tract was divided
into 27 lots that were allocated to the surviving tribal members,
among whom were people named Drighouse and Francis, which may be
corruptions of Driggus and Francisco.
A few allotments were sold immediately, but by 1830, half the reservation
remained in the hands of the tribal members. That year, the Nat
Turner rebellion occurred in Southampton County, and the remaining
Gingaskin sold their land.
Over
the years, Indian and mulatto families from the Eastern Shore of
Virginia migrated northward. Recent scholarship indicates that these
migrants included families named Harman, Johnson, Driggus, Carter,
Okey, Hansor, Francisco, and George, that were found among the Nanticoke
and Kent County groups. When the genealogies of these families are
examined, however, the picture is never so simple.
Some
Maryland Indian Families
Recent historians, obsessed with the popularity of black history
as a subject and a funding source, have mistakenly assumed that
every mulatto mentioned in the public record was a person of African
descent, even though the mass of evidence leads to another conclusion.
For example, there were the Puckhams.
The Puckham family of Worcester and Somerset Counties, Maryland,
is one of the few that can be identified with a documented seventeenth-century
Maryland Native American ancestor. The Cambridge family is almost
as clearly documented, and probably could be verified with a small
amount of research.
There
may be dozens of families in the lower Eastern Shore counties whose
Indian origins have been hidden uncritically behind the mulatto
label by historians who were looking for free blacks and not Indians.
John Puckham, an Indian, was baptized in 1682 and married Jone Johnson
shortly thereafter. The name Puckham may be an anglicized version
of the name of his village, in northern Somerset County. Because
Joan Johnson was a mulatto, the Puckhams have been classified by
subsequent historians as "Free Blacks."
Their sons, John and Richard, aged 13 and 10, were bound as apprentices
in 1699. During the eighteenth century, Puckhams appear on the public
records in Stepney Parish of Somerset County. Abraham Puckham was
called a "planter" in 1723 and was married to a transported white
felon named Honor Norgate. This was not the family's only white
liaison; at least two Puckham females had illegitimate children
by white men in Somerset County. It can be determined from the tax
rolls that Richard Puckham's wife was either white or mulatto, and
not black.
Even though their only documented non-white liaison was the mulatto
Joan Johnson, the eighteenth-century Puckhams have been grouped
by historians among the free blacks, possibly because later members
of the family were classified as blacks or mulattos. Matthew Puckham,
called a carpenter, sold his Maryland farm in 1771.
Matthew
may have moved to Kent County and joined the Native American remnant.
One Matthew Pucherm, called a "free negro," appears in the St. Jones
Hundred tax records in 1782, while Matthew and Richard Puckham were
listed in Broadkill Hundred without racial designation. An Ellinor
Puckham witnessed John Durham's will in 1788.
In
1748, a free mulatto named William Cambridge Hunt, later known as
William Cambridge, patented land that had been part of the Askibinakansen
Indian town near the present settlement of Taylor Gate in Worcester
County. The Indian town tract had been occupied during the same
decade, and may have still contained some Indian remnants; another
patentee on the town lands was Samuel Collick, also identified as
a "mulatto".
Because of the "mulatto" label, Cambridge and Collick have been
described as blacks by historians, in spite of the fact that they
appear to have been Indians claiming their shares of a dissolved
reservation.
The Cambridge family sold their Worcester County farm in 1801. The
name Cambridge appears early in the nineteenth century in the Cheswold
community. Even though Thomas Davidson included the Cambridge and
Puckham families in his study of "blacks" on the lower Eastern Shore,
the circumstances recited in his study indicate a probable Indian
origin for both families, with white intermixture.
The
name Driggus, associated with people of color throughout Delmarva,
provides an example of the confusion in the records. A Driggus family
is reported as white, or at least not nonwhite, in the 1800 census
for Murderkill Hundred, Kent County, Delaware. Davidson lists the
Driggus family of the lower Maryland shore as blacks, but the same
name, spelled Drighouse, was a major component of the Northampton
Indian tribe when the reservation was distributed in 1812.
All
probably were descended from Emanuel Driggus (Rodriguez). He and
his first wife, Frances, came into the Virginia colony as bondservants.
She died before attaining her freedom and he was free in 1660. His
second wife, Elizabeth, was white. Emanuel's pedigree is unknown,
but he may have come from a Portuguese or Spanish colony through
Dutch traders.
His
grandson, Azaricum, died a well-off slave-owning planter in 1738.
The name became Drighouse in some areas, including the Indian reservation,
and Driggus in other areas. All members of the family, including
the ones who lived on the reservation, were called mulattos or negroes
in Virginia and Maryland. One can only imagine why the Delaware
census canvasser thought they were white.
Historical
Questions
Native
American remnant groups exist in all parts of the Middle Atlantic,
but their historical records are nearly invisible. Historians have
tended to uncritically accept old racial labels, so that the history
of these people has been masked. Some writers, notably Deal and
Davidson, have swept the study of local Native Americans into black
history, continuing a long tradition.
There
is, clearly, a need for in-depth revisionist histories of the Native
American remnants. A few steps have been taken along this path,
by genealogists, by tribal organizations, and by a few academic
historians whose points of view are neither afrocentric nor eurocentric.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Searching
for Invisible Indians
&nbsp;
Finding
Assimilated Indian Populations in the Middle Atlantic Area
&nbsp;
Edward
Heite (1937 - 2005)
Heite Consulting
Camden DE 19934
Prepared
for the Eastern States Archaeological Federation annual meeting
Mount Laurel, NJ, November 1997
Throughout
the eastern coastal states, dozens of communities claim descent
from the contact-period Indian population. They certainly look like
Indians, and most of them can trace their ancestry back two or three
hundred years in the same locality. But they speak English and they
are fully integrated into the European-American society. Aside from
the fact that they tend to keep to themselves, these eastern Indians
are indistinguishable from the surrounding population.
The central Delaware Indian community is typical. For more than
two centuries, the community existed without formal organization,
and without recognition. Not a single member of the community was
officially described in any public record as an Indian throughout
the eighteenth, nineteenth, and part of the twentieth centuries.
Within
the past few generations, the community has achieved organization
and popular recognition as an Indian tribe and has retrospectively
defined itself as a continuing community. But there is not a single
historical document to indicate that these people or their ancestors
are, or were, Indians. Any attempt to define an Indian community
in the eastern states will be hampered by the forces that created
this phenomenon of invisibility.
During the colonial period, Indians gradually adopted an Anglo-American
way of life, native languages died out, and most of the community
members were living away from the few reservations, without any
legal status other than citizenship rights of property and equality
before the law with their other free neighbors.
It isn't easy to hide an entire ethnic group, but for the Indian
population, the process of joining European society included renunciation,
or at least subordination, of Indian identity. In the minds of many
settlers, one could not be a Christian Indian, or a civilized Indian.
Those who converted normally became mulattos in the eyes of law
and society.
During
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there was little stigma
to being a mulatto, as long as one was not a Negro as well. Some
people, classified as "mulattos," fought to retain Indian identity
after their tribal identification had been dissolved. In 1747 and
1792, mulatto individuals named William Bass obtained certificates
from Virginia courts to the effect that they were descended from
whites and Indians, and not from Negroes. As the traditional Indians
died off or moved away, their acculturated cousins tried to melt
into the dominant white culture while studiously avoiding wherever
possible the perceived taint of African admixture. Instead of being
called Indians, they were identified merely as "colored," even using
the term themselves.
A
Delaware law of 1740 acknowledged that Indians were still present,
since they were specifically permitted to hunt deer out of season.
Implicit in the exemption was the proposition that an Indian was,
among other characteristics, a person who depended upon wild meat.
Thirty years later, the legislature no longer acknowledged an Indian
presence. In 1770, the Delaware legislature declared, in response
to a letter from other colonies about regulating Indian trade: "...Upon
which we beg Leave, to observe, that the Inhabitants of this Government
have at present no Commerce or Intercourse whatsoever with the Indians,
and from their Situation cannot expect to have any with them hereafter;
..." The official position, then, was that there were no Indians
in or near the three Delaware counties by 1770. Two years earlier,
the legislature had paid a bill for accommodating "a Parcel of Indians
who were just visiting.
The
1770 communication reflects a further definition of an Indian, not
only as a person subsisting on wild meat, but as a person living
far from Delaware, on the frontier. But there were in fact persons
of primarily Indian descent in Delaware, living in all three counties,
and actually doing quite well, financially if not socially, in the
Anglo-American economy.
During the seventeenth century, landowning families named Butcher
and Consealor settled in Kent County. Their descendants formed the
nucleus of the mixed race community that still clusters around the
village of Cheswold. The story begins in 1693, when Thomas Conselor
bought 120 acres. He died in 1720. Daughters of his son, the second
Thomas Conselor, married men named Butcher and Francisco, or Sisco.
By the end of the eighteenth century, these three families and their
relatives had established an intergenerational pattern of marriage
and exclusivity shared with "mulatto" kinfolk in Sussex County.
Francisco (Sisco) is the only name in the early generations of the
community that clearly is associated in other documents with Native
Americans. Specifically, it appears among the Nanticoke leadership.
The name was present in this community before 1739, intermarried
with the Consealors and Butchers.
When William Handsor of Sussex County moved to the neighborhood
in 1735 he brought a second documented Indian family connection.
John Durham and William Handsor, were prosperous farmers and brothers
in law who lived near the head of St. Jones River and controlled
some of the best farmland in the county. We cannot know precisely
their racial origins, but most of their grandchildren were identified
as mulattos when racial designations began to appear in the record.
By the beginning of the Revolution, the community of interrelated
families had grown to include people named Butcher, Consealor, Durham,
Loatman, Dean, Handsor and Hewes.
Some
families who later joined the community had both Native American
and white ancestry. Members of the Indian-descended Puckham, Norwood,
Ridgeway and Cambridge families from Sussex or from Eastern Shore
Maryland, intermarried with the Kent County community early in the
nineteenth century. These new additions brought documented Indian
relationships into the community, at a time when racial divisions
were beginning to grow in American society.
The
Federal Constitution contained the first legal requirement that
all Americans be classified by race. In order to carry out the requirements
of the Constitution, each census taker was required to classify
each and every person as either white, slave, free person of color,
or an Indian not taxed. Indians who were not taxed, in that sense,
were all out in the west, in treaty relationships with the federal
government. Slaves were counted because they were not fully represented
in Congress. White people were enumerated, and every other free
person was a "free person of color."
Unfortunately,
too many historians have interpreted that "free persons of color"
column on the census return to be equivalent to "free blacks," when
in fact it enumerated many more persons of different racial stocks.
Among the free colored persons where the resident acculturated Indian
population, generally classified as mulattos, who frequently had
no African ancestry.
Thus that first great racial division of America lumped all the
free nonwhites into a single category from which only the most dogged
research can unscramble them.
Archaeology can help identify the Indian strain in a culture, as
Cara Blume will demonstrate in her study of worked glass at Bloomsbury,
but the key to finding the invisible East Coast Indian is genealogy.
Other
tribal groups have successfully documented their Indian origins.
The Nansemonds, in Virginia, were able to construct a genealogy
back to documented Indians in the seventeenth century that irrefutably
proved their ancestry.
During the period when race designations became commonplace, late
in the eighteenth century, many factors contributed to race perception,
or to the lack of pejorative designation. Rich folks could be defined
as white, or at least not called mulattos, regardless of their color
or ancestry. John, Charles, and Lydia Francisco are a case in point.
They were well-off and generally literate.
John Francisco was the son-in-law of John Durham the elder, who
apparently was white. Both appear in the 1782 state census and assessment
without racial designation. When John Francisco died in 1791, his
estate was worth more than a thousand pounds.
John's
son Charles lived in a six-room house and left an inventory worth
more than 700 when he died in 1800. John's daughter Esther called
herself a "free woman of color" in her 1810 will. Their sister Lydia
left silver spoons and an indentured boy's time. These are all decidedly
indicators of middle-class economic status as well as education
and gentility.
Other
Francisco family members, who were not so well off, were treated
as mulattos and looked down upon. Another descendant of John Durham,
who apparently was regarded as white, died and left a substantial
estate. When his widow remarried a poor and illiterate Francisco,
the person who had signed a bond for the estate administration was
able to get his bond canceled because the widow had married a "mulatto,"
who probably was a cousin of her "white" husband.
These contradictions provide a clue to the racial nature of the
mixed race community at the end of the eighteenth century. The interrelated
community consisted of lines with varying degrees of white and Indian
lineage, and race perception was tempered by a certain deference
to wealth and status.
Some recorders, notably the census taker in 1800, recorded every
nonwhite as a Negro. The 1805 tax assessor was similarly inclined.
Aside from Negro, the only nonwhite category available for listing
was "mulatto," which they chose not to use.
The
ambiguous term "mulatto" is the most frequent label used to describe
the "yellow" people of the Indian remnant communities throughout
the Middle Atlantic. While each colony and state had its own racial
definitions, there was a certain consistency among them.
The
Oxford English Dictionary cites an example from 1709 in which a
person was both a mulatto and an Indian.
Virginia described Indians' children by white partners as mulattos
in a 1705 law that also identified white/African mixtures as mulattos.
While African-descended persons were always mulattos (the "one drop"
rule), a person with three European and one Indian grandparent was
not a mulatto. A similar rule was followed in Maryland.
In colonial Delaware, a person could be a mulatto without African
ancestry, as the case of Jacob Frederick illustrated. In 1699, Frederick
successfully argued in court that he was a mulatto without any African
ancestry, and he was treated before the law the same as a white
person.
During the eighteenth century, the term "Indian," as a rule, did
not appear in the Delaware public records. The exceptions were militia
muster rolls, where two members of the Norwood family are listed,
one of them described as an Indian. A decade later, the "Indian"
Norwood became a "mulatto" when his child was baptized at St. George's
Chapel. The "mulatto" label is consistently applied in the records
of this church to the Indian community.
The fallacy of accepting "mulatto" as equaling "Negro" has led to
serious misperceptions by scholars, up to and including the present
generation who have cited Indian examples to illustrate statements
about free blacks. The cumulative effect of this top-down lumping
of nonwhites has been to eliminate from the historical literature
all distinctions among "mulatto" groups, including Indians.
During the first half of the nineteenth century, as racial tensions
increased, the Indian community drew into itself. Young people married
within their local community, or traveled to live among similar
communities up and down the coast. Carefully avoiding contact with
the free blacks and the whites around them, they kept a low profile.
When they suffered a setback, their response most frequently was
to move away or draw back. Some families crossed into New Jersey,
where racial conditions were more congenial, and some families moved
to Canada. Others moved west to be with their emigrant cousins.
One is struck instantly by the intermarriage among the families
that began early in the eighteenth century and continues to the
present. When members married outside the local group, they tended
to find families of known Indian heritage and incorporated them
into the community. During the nineteenth century, a number of already-related
Indian families joined the Central Delaware group from Sussex County
and farther south.
The decline of the community's status was documented by Louise Heite
in her study of Fork Branch . During the middle years of the eighteenth
century, the core families were prosperous and literate. The generation
that died around 1800 included several well-off and literate individuals,
who represent a high point in the community's history.
Our Bloomsbury site was occupied by the next generation, which was
the first to feel the full pressure of downward mobility. John Sisco
and Thomas Consealor were sons of well-off farmers, who undoubtedly
had been raised in middle-class surroundings at the beginning of
the race-perception slide. Consealor enjoyed good store credit but
was identified as "mulatto" in the merchant's accounts.
Stylish shell-edge pearlware plates were on the table, but only
a few. Stylish shoes with pointed toes were mended at home, and
there were a few silver spoons. The assemblage speaks of downward
mobility of a young family with a genteel landowning background,
reduced to farming the land of a wealthy family friend and patron.
Ultimately, Thomas was evicted by the next generation of landlord
and moved to New Jersey where the racial climate was more benign.
Elsewhere,
the second and third generation heirs of William Handsor and John
Durham were losing their ancestral lands by subdivision and sale,
without acquiring new property. When the free school act was implemented,
they were denied public education, and were further marginalized
as race codes became more strict on the heels of slave rebellion
after 1830.
Some
voted with their feet against these laws, moving to New Jersey or
to Canada as well as to other parts of the north. Those who stayed
would wait another century before the first glimmerings of public
recognition separated them from the larger nonwhite population.
Their perseverance through this period before they were "rediscovered"
by twentieth-century anthropological researchers has never been
publicly documented, but its results can be seen today in the form
of a homogenous community in which the same families continue to
live together and intermarry, although to a lesser extent than before.
Ironically, it was the end of oppressive legally-sanctioned discrimination
and segregation that caused the community to begin dispersing and
losing some of its definition. As housing, marriage, and employment
opportunities have expanded, the need to band together has faded
away. In response to this perceived loss of community, a small band
of descendants have organized a corporate body with the avowed purpose
of uniting the community into a recognized tribe.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Bloomsbury
&nbsp;
Introductory
Remarks
&nbsp;
Middle
Atlantic Archaeological Conference
March
7, 1997
Edward
F. Heite (1937 - 2005)
This
is a story about a site, where the wells were shallow and the poverty
was deep. In spite of their poverty, the inhabitants owned stylish
creamware and pearlware teawares , but they mended their precious
trailed-slip decorated red earthenware.
Bloomsbury
was occupied during the last third of the eighteenth century by
a series of three or four tenant families, some of whom were people
of Native American heritage.
Kent Countys Native American community was in the process of change.
The last villages and reservations on Delmarva were dissolved during
the decade preceding 1750. People from Delmarva were relocating
to the north and the west.
Nanticokes
took refuge with the British army at Fort Niagara during the Revolution.
But some Indian families stayed behind, merging invisibly into the
larger society. In Kent County, a new community developed, attracting
Native people from other parts of Delmarva, and probably from other
parts of America as well. The newcomers included members of the
Puckham, Cambridge, Sanders, Dean, Sammons and Sisco families who
originated farther south on the eastern shore of Maryland and Virginia.
Historians are hampered in their study of these Native American
families by a peculiarity of local terminology. Indian people who
accepted baptism ceased to be Indians in the eyes of the larger
community. Once they were baptized and became taxpaying landowners,
former Indians became mulattos in the eyes of the law. In those
days, one could be a mulatto or a colored person, regardless of
ancestry.
Indeed, it appears from our research that many, if not most , of
the people who were called mulattos in eighteenth-century records
had no Negro ancestry whatever. The only way for a modern historian
to determine the racial origin of a person is to analyze their status
before the law. Certain laws and customs applied to free blacks,
and a different set of rules applied to whites.
Because the law was basically bi-polar, a person was treated either
as black or white, which for centuries was a cause of vexation and
difficulty for people who happened to belong in the middle.
In most cases, we have discovered that Indian people were treated
before the law as whites, while mulattos with Negro ancestry were
treated as blacks.
The
two communities kept apart, so that the witnesses on an Indian document
are likely to be Indian or white, while the witnesses on a Negro
document are likely to be black or white. As early as 1720, the
Indian community in Kent County had closed ranks, creating a closed
society that has persisted to this day.
The
actual origin and status of a so-called colored person can be determined
only by examining the way he or she interacted with the larger society.
For example, William Cambridge was identified as a mulatto when
he took up land during the abandonment of a Maryland Indian town.
He was a pew holder in the local Presbyterian church, and apparently
was a mainstream member of the larger community. Shortly after the
Revolution, members of the Cambridge family joined the Kent County
Indian community, together with members of the Puckham family from
the same area.
Another
newcomer family was the Francisco or Sisco family, who originated
on the lower Shore. People named Sisco were among the Nanticokes
who moved north after the 1742 Winnesocum disaster, and our current
research indicates that they have left a string of living relatives
stretching from Virginia to Canada. John Sisco, a member of the
third generation of his family in Kent County, occupied the Bloomsbury
property around 1800, and probably was the person who demolished
and cleaned up the site around 1806.
When
we approached the site, therefore, we were faced with the problem
of detecting ethnicity, even though we were unsure of the exact
origins of all the families that had lived on the site.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Mitsawoket
&nbsp;
Edward
Heite (1937 - 2005)
Heite Consulting
Camden DE 19934
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The
Pumpkin Neck community was the geographical context of the Bloomsbury
site, which we have been investigating for nearly four years. For
better or for worse, the people of Pumpkin Neck were thrown together
by virtue of land tenure and lines of communication. Some of these
people were members of another community, the &quot;small race&quot;
of Indian descendants who already had formed a separate community
in Duck Creek and Little Creek hundreds of Kent County.
This
community was, and still is, a tightly-woven self-selecting web
of kinship, social obligations, patronage, and solidarity that survived
without an institutional focus, or even a proper name, through more
than two centuries (Heite and Heite 1985).
What
is a Community?
A
community is more than a mere collection of people and houses. A
community is more correctly described as a collection of relationships
among people who are somehow connected by proximity, origin, blood,
language, or some other tie, tangible or intangible, expressed or
tacitly assumed. Some communities are easily recognized; a town,
or a professional society, or a church are obvious communities that
declare their own definitions for all to see.
But
by such a definition, community may also exist beyond public view,
or it may be invisible even to its own members. Because they can
be both ambiguous and ubiquitous, communities must first be defined,
before they can be examined. The Kent County remnant Indian community
falls into this category. For more than two centuries, the community
existed without formal organization, and without recognition from
the community at large. Within the past few generations, the community
has achieved organization and popular recognition as an Indian tribe
and has retrospectively defined itself as a continuing community.
Since
it historically issued no membership certificates or kept a tribal
roll, or even named a recognized leader, the &quot;Cheswold&quot;
community defies definition in the heavily formalized environment
of tribal recognition. Admission to the Delaware Indian corporate
bodies today is achieved by demonstrating genealogical connection
to people who are generally accepted as being past members of the
community.
The
nearest approach to a published roster has been the genealogy of
early descendants of William Handsor, published in an earlier report
in this series (Heite and Heite 1985) and a useful but anecdotal
community history published more than a half-century ago (Weslager
1943).
In
order to provide more solid documentation of the community, it was
necessary to adopt proven techniques from community studies in other
areas. To find evidence beyond the traditional narrative sources,
social historians draw inferences from vital statistics, tax, probate,
and similar aggregated records.
Community
historians in other localities have developed methods that involve
new approaches to the historical records. In their pioneering study
of relationships, researchers at the St. Mary's City Commission
in Maryland have compiled biographies of the county's earliest settlers
by &quot;stripping of relevant record series&quot; for all proper
names. This technique allows the researcher to identify each individual's
personal relationships at all levels, and to place him in a community
context (Walsh 1988:219). A similar approach is being used by the
Delaware Bureau of Museums and Historic Sites for their seventeenth-century
project (Charles Fithian, personal communication). A similar, if
much less ambitious, method was used to develop a definition of
the local Native community during the period when Bloomsbury was
occupied. The resulting biographical directory follows.
Who
is an Indian?
Any
attempt to define an Indian community in the eastern states will
be hampered by the invisibility factor. Cultural disappearance seems
to have been a survival strategy for remnant communities throughout
the east during the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries.
In
Virginia, Indians gradually adopted an Anglo-American way of life,
native languages died out, and most of the community members were
living off the few reservations. The communities kept to themselves
and were lumped for government purposes with other &quot;free persons
of color&quot; until after the Civil War (Rountree 1990, 1996: 187-189).
Precisely the same course of events occurred in Delaware. No individual
in the Kent County community was identified as an Indian until 1892,
and then only in a newspaper article.
It
isn't easy to hide an entire ethnic group, but for the Indian population,
the process of joining European society included renunciation, or
at least subordination, of Indian identity. In the minds of many
settlers, one could not be a Christian Indian, or a civilized Indian.
Those who converted became mulattoes in the eyes of law and society.
This is well demonstrated by the descendants of John Puckham of
Maryland, the Christianized Indian , and his wife, Jone Johnson,
&quot;mulatto,&quot; granddaughter of Anthony Johnson and his white
wife.
The
best-documented seventeenth-century Indians in lower Delaware were
the ones who sold the territory to European settlers. Between Duck
Creek and the St. Jones, land was sold by an Indian with the curious
name of Christian, also known as Petticoquewan, who claimed to be
lord, owner, and chief sachem of Mitsawokett. Between 1677 and 1684,
he conveyed thousands of acres to settlers, often in trade for powder
and shot or for drink, or for clothing (Kent County Deed Books A-1:
10, 14; B-1: 2, 8 10-13, 20-21, 36).
The
territory of Mitsawokett became northern Kent County, encompassing
the hundreds of St. Jones, Little Creek and Duck Creek, but the
name of Christian or Petticoquewan is missing from the records after
about 1684.
For
another century, references to people identified as Indians in Delaware
are sparse and fleeting. An Indian named Samuel Boarman was bound
by the Kent County court in 1719 to serve three years as payment
for medical care following a gunshot wound (Hancock 1974:49). He
may have been the last officially identified Indian in the county
records for another two centuries.
Some
people in the community bore family names that are firmly documented
as Indians, but few Kent County residents claimed that heritage
in any public document. People named Francisco (Sisco), Norwood,
Cambridge, and Puckham are known from records elsewhere to have
been identified as Indians during their lifetimes, but their relatives
in Mitsawokett did not press the claim.
Indirect
references to &quot;Indian&quot; origins are found in personal physical
descriptions, including the narrative of Judge Fisher. A James Dean
of Smyrna was described in an affidavit filed in 1853 as &quot;of
Indian descent&quot; as part of the program of seamen's protective
papers (Macdonald 1992). Other people with surnames found in the
community were identified as Indians, or persons appearing to be
Indians, in these papers.
Between
1790 and 1862, American seamen could protect themselves against
impressment by the British by carrying protective papers issued
by the federal government. These papers included physical descriptions.
Betty Harrington Macdonald has abstracted Delaware entries (Macdonald
1992):
Applicant's
name
Date
of
declaration
and age
Computed
date of
birth
Place
of
birth
Physical
description
Witness
Nathaniel
Clark
1827
23
1804
Sussex
Co.
a
colored man of the
Indian race
James
Lord
James
Hansor
1831
17
1814
Sussex
Co.
Indian
complexion
Cary
Hansor
Elihu
Ridgeway
1846
28
1818
Indian
River
Indian
complexion
William
Shorter
Benjamin
Norwood
1853
30
1823
Indian
River
Indian
complexion
Capt
W. H. Lingo
John
Dean
1853
27
1826
Smyrna
of
Indian descent
Capt
W. H. Lingo
Eli
Herman (Harmon?)
1853
24
1829
Indian
River
Indian
complexion
Indian, black straight hair
(crew list)
George
Brown
T.
Robinson Hanzar
1858
19
1839
Indian
River
Indian
complexion
****
Charles
Dunning
1859
28
1831
Dagsboro
Indian
complexion
****
Stephen
Morris
1860
21
1839
Lewes
Indian
complexion
****
Thomas
Harmon
1860
28
1832
Sussex
Co.
Indian
complexion
****
&nbsp;
It
is apparent that remaining Indians quietly merged into the surrounding
populations, without raising a fuss. Only on rare occasions do we
have information about the mechanics of their transition into the
new economic and social system.
One
of the earliest Indians in the Middle Atlantic region who was known
to join the European economy was Ned Gunstocker of Virginia, who
patented 150 acres on the Rappahannock by virtue of transportation
of three European settlers into Virginia. In 1699, a Virginia court
confirmed that an Indian living outside a tribal reserve could in
fact own property under the English system of land tenure (Rountree
1990:136). Other Indians made the move from the native society to
the European system, but their activities are not so well documented
as Gunstocker's.
From
the last quarter of the seventeenth century, the non-tribal Indian
population is lost in historical limbo as they merged into the mulatto
segment of mainstream Anglo-American society.
Some
people, classified as &quot;mulattoes,&quot; struggled to retain
Indian identity after their ties to tribes had been cut. In 1747
and 1792, individuals named William Bass obtained certificates from
Virginia courts to the effect that they were descended from whites
and Indians, and not from Negroes (Rountree 1990: 160). The Bass
who married into Kent County's Durham family soon thereafter made
no such declaration and cannot be tied genealogically to William.
As traditional Indians died off or moved away, their acculturated
cousins tried to melt into the dominant Christian white culture
without acquiring the perceived taint of African admixture. Instead
of being called Indians, they called themselves &quot;colored.&quot;
Some fell off this racial-perception tightrope, but a surprising
number kept their balance.
A
Delaware law of 1740 (13 George II Chapter LXXIV) acknowledged that
Indians were still present, since they were exempted from deer-hunting
regulations. Implicit in the exemption was the proposition that
an Indian was, among other characteristics, a non-Christian person
who depended upon wild deer meat. A Christian farmer who kept livestock
and ate beef and pork presumably could not be an Indian, regardless
of ancestry.
In
1770, the Delaware legislature declared (Minutes :
270), in response to a letter from other colonies about regulating
Indian trade:
...Upon
which we beg Leave, to observe, that the Inhabitants of this Government
have at present no Commerce or Intercourse whatsoever with the Indians,
and from their Situation cannot expect to have any with them hereafter;
The
official position, then, was that there were no Indians in or near
the three Delaware counties by 1770. Two years earlier, the legislature
had appropriated 16/6/1 to pay for accommodating &quot;a Parcel
of Indians.&quot; (Minutes : 151) who were just visiting.
The
1770 communication reflects a further definition of an Indian, not
only as a non-Christian person subsisting on wild meat, but as a
person living in a &quot;Situation&quot; far from Delaware, on the
frontier.
Settlement
of the disputed boundary with Maryland in 1760 had brought into
Sussex County areas where the last official Maryland Eastern Shore
Indian towns had existed, but the Delaware legislature ignored any
remaining Indians in the new territories.
Defining
this Community
In
spite of the official denials, a tight-knit community began to develop
during the first half of the nineteenth century. Because genetic
background was not an issue, nobody bothered to identify these people
by race, even though they obviously identified one another.
During
the seventeenth century, landowning families named Butcher and Conselor
(Gonsela, etc.) settled in Little Creek Hundred. Their descendants
formed the nucleus of the interrelated community that still clusters
around the village of Cheswold.
The
story that emerges from the cumulative biography begins before 1693,
when Thomas Conselor (Gonselah), already a resident of the county,
occupied 120 acres on the north side of Little Creek, in Little
Creek Neck. He died in 1720.
As
early as the second decade of the eighteenth century, families that
later became the core community had begun to intermarry among themselves.
Folklore, cited by Scharf (1888) identifies the same era for the
community's establishment.
Daughters
of the second Thomas Conselor married a Butcher and a Francisco.
A third daughter had an apparently illegitimate or orphaned son,
named William, and became the chief beneficiary of the grandfather's
will. This William Conselor probably was to become the grandfather
of the Thomas Conselor who later lived at Bloomsbury.
Francisco
(Sisco) is the only surname among the early Kent County generations
that was then associated in other contemporary documents with Native
Americans. Specifically, the surname appears among the Nanticoke
leadership when the tribe was living on the upper Susquehanna. The
name appears in the Kent County community before 1739, intermarried
with the Conselors and Butchers.
When
William Handsor moved to the neighborhood in 1735 he brought a second
documented Indian connection. He is believed to have been an Indian,
but the first official reference to him as a &quot;mulatto&quot;
occurred a generation after his death.
William
Handsor moved to Kent County in 1735, but he left grown sons in
Sussex. In Kent County, he was married at least once, possibly twice
again. One wife John Durham's sister.
John
Durham and William Handsor were prosperous farmers who lived near
the head of St. Jones River and controlled some of the best farmland
in the county. We cannot know precisely their racial origins, but
most of their grandchildren were identified as mulattoes when racial
designations began to appear regularly in the record. Some of John
Durham's descendants, however, were identified as white, which has
led some researchers to speculate that the Native American element
entered his family through some of his children's marriages into
the existing community of interrelated families who were, by implication,
nonwhites.
By
the beginning of the Revolution, the community of interrelated families
around the head of Fork Branch had grown to include people named
Butcher, Conselor, Durham, Loatman, Dean, Francisco, Miller, Handsor
and Hewes.
Some
families who later joined the community had primarily Native American
ancestry. Members of the Puckham, Norwood, Ridgeway and Cambridge
families, for example, from Sussex or from Eastern Shore Maryland,
intermarried with the Kent County community during the antebellum
period. The Sparksman family are known in New Jersey as Indians,
and one member of the community is known to have moved across the
river when he married one. According to a tradition in the modern
Morris family, members of the Owens family of Lenape Indians moved
to Kent County from Delaware Water Gap.
Descendants
of the eighteenth-century Kent County community are today generally
acknowledged to be Indians, even though none were legally recognized
as such until quite recently. Proving Indian ancestry is very different
from merely &quot;knowing&quot; that one is Indian.
Archaeology
can provide hints concerning the Indian strain, as demonstrated
in the study of worked glass at Bloomsbury, but the key to legally
acceptable documentation is genealogy. Other tribal groups have
successfully documented their Indian origins to the satisfaction
of public agencies. The Nansemonds, in Virginia, constructed a genealogy
back to documented Indians in the seventeenth century that irrefutably
proved their ancestry (Rountree 1990:267).
Factors
in Race Perception
During
the period when race designations became mandatory, late in the
eighteenth century, many factors contributed to race perception,
or to the lack of pejorative designation.
Rich
folks could be defined as white, or at least not called mulattoes,
regardless of their appearance or ancestry. John, Charles, and Lydia
Francisco are a case in point. They were well-off and generally
literate.
John
Francisco was the son-in-law of John Durham the elder, who apparently
was considered to be white. Both appear in the 1782 census and assessment
without racial designation. When John Francisco died in 1791, his
movable estate was worth nearly a thousand pounds.
John's
son Charles lived in a six-room house and left an inventory worth
more than 700 when he died in 1800. John's daughter Esther called
herself a &quot;free woman of color&quot; in her 1810 will. John's
daughter Lydia left silver spoons and an indentured boy's time.
These are all decidedly indicators of substantial middle-class economic
status indistinguishable from their well-off white neighbors.
Other
Francisco family members, who were not so well off, were treated
as mulattoes and looked down upon. Another descendant of John Durham,
who apparently was regarded as white, died and left a substantial
estate. When his widow remarried a poor and illiterate Sisco, the
person who had signed a bond for the estate administration was able
to get his bond cancelled because the widow had married a &quot;mulatto,&quot;
who probably was a first cousin of her &quot;white&quot; husband.
Elijah
Conselor, another well-off member of the community, is listed in
the 1800 census without &quot;n&quot; after his name, in a household
of 11 free nonwhites. Another &quot;free person of color&quot; with
no &quot;n&quot; after her name was his sister-in-law Elizabeth
(Letitia) LaCount, John Durham's daughter.
These
contradictions provide a clue to the racial nature of the community
at the end of the eighteenth century. The interrelated community
consisted of lines with varying degrees of white and Indian lineage,
and race perception was tempered by a certain deference to wealth
and status.
Evolving
Race Terminology
Some
recorders, notably the census taker in 1800, recorded virtually
every nonwhite as a Negro. The 1805 tax assessor was similarly inclined.
Aside from Negro, the only nonwhite category available for listing
was &quot;mulatto,&quot; which has evolved through several different
meanings over time (Heite and Heite 1985: 18).
The
ambiguous term &quot;mulatto&quot; is the most frequent term used
to describe the &quot;high yellow&quot; people of the Indian remnant
communities throughout the Middle Atlantic. While each colony had
its own racial definitions, there was a certain consistency among
them.
Virginia
described Indians' children as mulattoes in a 1705 law that also
identified white/African mixtures as mulattoes. While African-descended
persons were always mulattoes (the &quot;one drop&quot; rule), a
person with three European and one Indian grandparent was not a
mulatto. A similar rule was followed in Maryland (Cissna 1986: 204-205).
The
Oxford English Dictionary cites an example from 1709
in which a person was both a mulatto and an Indian. In colonial
Delaware, a person could be a mulatto without African ancestry,
as the case of Jacob Frederick illustrated (Horle 1991: 1049, 1195,
1291).
Rarely were people explicitly labelled &quot;Indians&quot; during
the eighteenth century in Delaware. An exception was on a militia
muster roll (McClughan 1858), where two members of the Norwood family
are listed, one of them as an Indian, and another person's occupation
was given as &quot;Indian.&quot; A decade later, an &quot;Indian&quot;
Norwood became a &quot;mulatto&quot; when his child was baptised
at St. George's Chapel, the home church to many in the community.
The &quot;mulatto&quot; label is consistently applied in the records
of this church to the Indian community.
All
free nonwhites were classified in the 1800 census as free persons
of color, lumping blacks, mulattoes, Indians all together in a category.
Subsequent historians have erroneously chosen to lump all the people
in this category as &quot;free blacks.&quot; The fallacy of interpreting
entries labelled &quot;mulatto&quot; as synonymous with &quot;African&quot;
has led to serious misperceptions among scholars, up to and including
the present generation (Davidson 1991: 7), who have cited Indian
examples to illustrate statements about free blacks.
In
1740, the Delaware legislature declared that &quot; it is found
by experience, that free Negroes and Mulattoes are idle and slothful,
and often prove burthensome to the neighbourhood wherein they live,
and are an evil example to slaves; &quot; (13 George II Chapter
LXXVII).
A
member of this community, Stephen Sparksman, otherwise described
as a mulatto, was classified as a Negro by modern historians on
the basis of his inclusion in the nonwhite census category and his
identification as a mulatto, even though his probable family in
New Jersey were Indians (Grettler, Miller, Catts, Doms, Guttman,
Iplenski, Hoseth, Hodny and Custer 1996: 104).
Another
historian, laboring under the same misperception, counted the entries
for free persons of color in the 1800-1850 census, and presumed
that all were black. He then used these totals to derive statistics
regarding freedom and slavery, and to quantify the relationship
of free versus slave blacks (Bendler 1993).
So
universal is this misperception that it casts doubt on any compiled
historical statistics dealing with race in Delaware, and any conclusions
derived from such compiled statistical reports.
In
another recent report, a historian described a household as containing
whites and African-Americans in the 1840 census, when in fact the
census described whites and free persons of color ,
without specifying the color. This misinterpretation masked not
only the true ethnic nature of a mixed-race household but the racial
dynamics of a family's evolving racial history (Andrzejewski 1995:75).
The
cumulative effect of this top-down lumping of all nonwhites has
been to mask from the historical literature all distinctions among
&quot;mulatto&quot; groups who may have been Indian or part-Indian.
Part
of the ambiguity in Delaware may derive from the fact that its legal
code came rather late to the game of defining rights in race terms.
The 1734 election law (7 George II, Chapter 41) made no mention
of any voter qualifications except residence and property. The 1792
state constitution narrowed the franchise to white male freeholders
or their young sons over 21.
Discovering
a Community
The
Pumpkin Neck community on Duck Creek Neck can be characterized in
terms of proximity, genealogy, and commercial relationships. The
social and economic dimensions of the community are fairly clear
and well documented. Essentially the Pumpkin Neck community structure
was imposed by the white landowning class who decided everyone's
place of residence and defined the economic structure within geographical
boundaries.
But
the people who lived at the Bloomsbury site were not, then at least,
landowners.
The
original objective of this exercise was to categorize John Sisco,
Thomas Conselor, and Agness Sappington in terms of ethnicity, and
then to place them within their own ethnic community. Conselor and
Sisco were called &quot;mulatto&quot; in contemporary records, which
then effectively meant &quot;not-white-not-black&quot; and nothing
more. The first job was to trace their genealogies, to find their
relatives. This done, a community could be inferred. Unfortunately,
the eighteenth-century history of the community did not exist, even
though many genealogists had traced lineages through it.
A
biographical directory was the chosen vehicle for sorting the community.
Each probate record was abstracted in order to produce a list of
names and fixed dates (i.e. death dates) for a maximum number of
individuals. Within this structure it was possible to flesh out
the individual biographies.
In
addition to related community members, the directory includes persons
who witnessed documents or signed bonds for members of the community.
These were trusted friends and business associates, who constituted
the unrelated periphery.
One is struck instantly by the intermarriage among the families
that began during the first third of the eighteenth century and
continued to the present. When members married outside the local
group, they tended to find families of known Indian heritage and
incorporated them into the community. During the nineteenth century,
members of already-related Indian families joined the local group
from Sussex County and farther south.
During
the period studied, only one person, John Lockerman, appears to
have been regarded by his wife's relatives as a Negro, and he left
no descendants. None of the group's legal documents were witnessed
by blacks. While black admixture can never be denied, there is no
evidence that it took place in Kent County's &quot;Cheswold&quot;
community after the beginning of the eighteenth century. As Blakey
(1988) has pointed out, other similar communities have not followed
this exclusionary practice so rigidly.
Community
members today report a tradition of extreme cultural revulsion against
intermarriage with blacks. By the same token, mixing with whites
was not forbidden but was discouraged.
Institutional
Continuity
After
the seventeenth century, there is no record of an organized Native
American body in Kent County. About 1850, Rev. Silas Murray of the
Smyrna circuit of the Methodist Episcopal Church organized a class
at duPont's Mills, with eleven members. Robert Carney, who is said
to have come from Sussex County, was the class leader. From a slab
shanty, the group moved to a log church and finally to a frame chapel,
which opened in 1883 (Scharf 1888:1087). This church, known as Little
Union or Fork Branch, still stands. A short distance away, at Bishop's
Corner, Sutton's Chapel was built about 1830. This church was regarded
as &quot;African,&quot; by white contemporaries, including the Beers
Atlas of 1868. A new church was built in 1876 and renamed
Manship. In 1886, the trustees obtained a quarter-acre on the west
side of the churchyard for use as an extension to the burial ground.
The
deed identified the church as Methodist Episcopal, and the trustees
were Absalom Saunders, Cornelius Ridgeway, Elisha Durham, John Morgan,
William Morgan, Clifton Durham, John Carter, Jr., and John Carter,
Sr.
A
few years later, in 1892, David and Mary Hoar of Philadelphia laid
out an addition to the plan of Cheswold, along the west side of
the railroad and south of the original townsite. A building lot
on the south end of the plot was conveyed to the trustees of both
Little Union and Manship Methodist Episcopal churches as tenants
in common. Trustees named in the deed were Absalom Saunders, James
R. Brown, James H. Seeney, Charlie H. Saunders, James K. Morgan,
Cornelius Ridgeway, Moses Coker, Elisha Durham, Hopewell Carter,
Allen Reed, Samuel C. Johns, George W. Mosley, Tilghman Ridgeway,
David W. Mosley, William M. Carney, Burton Johnson, and Edward Reed.
Manship,
now known as Immanuel, is still active at Bishop's Corner. The Little
Union church building still stands, but the congregation no longer
exists. A congregation of Seventh-Day Adventists was later organized
in the community, and some of its members moved to the Battle Creek
area of Michigan, a center of that denomination.
Native
American people were excluded from the free universal public school
system established in 1829, even though all races had attended the
previous, less universal, free schools (Hancock 1971:210). They
eventually were able to establish schools for their own people,
separate from both blacks and whites. The 1921 school code recognized
&quot;moors&quot; as separate group, without identifying them as
Indians. With integration, such legal distinctions were wiped out.
Recently
the local community has incorporated a body called the Lenape Indian
Tribe of Delaware. Some in the community are members of the Nanticoke-Lenape
Tribe, based in Bridgeton, New Jersey. In Sussex County, the Nanticoke
are organized, with membership overlapping. All three organizations
hold pow-wow gatherings.
Bloomsbury
in this Context
Material
culture from the Bloomsbury site suggests some of the downwardly-mobile
forces that were acting upon the community around the end of the
eighteenth century.
Decline
of the community's status was documented by Louise Heite in her
study of Fork Branch (Heite and Heite 1985: 16-23). During the middle
years of the eighteenth century, the core families were prosperous
and literate. The generation that died around 1800 included several
well-off and literate individuals, who represent a high point in
the community's history. By the time of the Civil War, their economic
and social status had dropped significantly.
John
Sisco and Thomas Conselor, the tenants at Bloomsbury, were sons
of well-off farmers, who undoubtedly had been raised in middle-class
surroundings at the beginning of the race-perception slide. Conselor
enjoyed good store credit but was identified as &quot;mulatto&quot;
in the merchant's accounts.
Stylish
shell-edge pearlware plates were on the table, but only a few. Stylish
shoes with pointed toes were mended at home, and there were a few
silver spoons. The assemblage speaks of downward mobility of a family
with a genteel landowning background, reduced to farming the land
of a wealthy family friend and patron. Ultimately, Thomas was evicted
by the next generation of Francis Denney's heirs and moved to New
Jersey where the racial climate was more benign.
Elsewhere,
the second and third generation heirs of William Handsor and John
Durham were losing their ancestral lands by subdivision and sale,
without acquiring new property. When the free school act was implemented,
they were denied public education, and were further marginalized
as race codes became more strict on the heels of slave rebellion
after 1830. The law that later snared Levin Sockum and Isaac Harmon
was only one of the racist regulations that lumped the &quot;mulatto&quot;
Indians with the blacks.
Some
voted with their feet against these laws, moving to New Jersey or
Canada as well as to other parts of the north. Those who stayed
would wait another century before the first glimmerings of public
recognition separated them from the larger nonwhite community. Their
perseverance through this period before they were &quot;rediscovered&quot;
by twentieth-century anthropological researchers has never been
publicly documented, but its results can be seen today in the form
of a homogenous community in which the same families continue to
live together and intermarry, although to a lesser extent than before.
Ironically,
it was the end of legally-sanctioned discrimination and segregation
that caused the community to begin dispersing and losing some of
its definition. As housing, marriage, and employment opportunities
have expanded, the externally imposed need to band together has
faded away. In response to this perceived loss of enforced traditional
community, small bands of descendants organized corporate bodies
with the avowed purpose of uniting the community into a recognized
tribe.
On
the Internet, a nationwide community of Mitsawokett descendants
have been sharing genealogical notes, creating a body of documentation
that crisscrosses the United States and Canada.
The
Community
On
the following pages are capsule biographies of the founding generations
of the community, and their associates. Primary entires were compiled
by copying first the probated records of each person. Each person
was identified first by death date, and a biographical entry was
created with that information. Then a separate biographical entry
was created for each child and spouse named in a probate record.
Associated,
but unrelated, individuals were given an entry. Each person who
witnessed a document or posted a bond received an entry. A picture
of a community emerged, and individuals took shape in the record.
The
resulting biographical directory chronicles the community's memberships
and relationships from the seventeenth century through the early
nineteenth century. The directory surprised even the genealogists
who have been researching these families for many years, because
it provides a cross section rather than the vertical view of the
families that genealogies usually provide. Some gaps still exist,
for other researchers to fill.
Aside
from its genealogical interest, the directory, for the first time,
allows researchers to &quot;eavesdrop&quot; on the inner workings
and relationships within an eighteenth-century Delaware community.
It is not finished, nor will it ever be.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
BIOGRAPHICAL
DIRECTORY OF
KENT COUNTY, DELAWARE
An
eighteenth-century Delaware community in the Pumpkin
Neck community of Duck Creek Neck and surrounding
areas of Kent County, Delaware, its Native American-descended
members and persons associated with them.
&nbsp;
Edward
Heite (1937 - 2005)
Heite Consulting
Camden DE 19934
Abraham
Allee was the landlord of Bloomsbury, son of John Allee,
and son-in-law of Francis
Denney. In 1814 he went bond for the executor of George
Francisco and evicted Thomas Conselor.
Jonathan
Allee was administrator of the estate of Benjamin Loatman
in 1768-1771.
John
Allee (c. 1748-1787) went surety for his brother, Jonathan
Allee's, administration of the
estate of Benjamin Loatman in 1768-1771. He inherited
the eastern third of Bloomsbury that his son Abraham
later inherited.
Robert
Arthurs with John Rees made the inventory of the estate
of Isabel Hewes (Hughes).
Phillis
Asco was the principal heir of Robert Butcher, Sr.,
of Little Creek Hundred, named in his 1722 will probated
in 1731.
Abraham
Barber prepared Daniel Durham's estate inventory in
1815.
Dorothea
Miller Barber, daughter of John Miller, Married John
Barber around 1795.
Griffin
Bass married Unice, widow of Daniel Durham. He signed
the account of Daniel's estate in 1801.
Unice
(Nicey) Durham Bass widow of Daniel Durham married Griffin
Bass around 1801.
Adam
Butcher of Kent County recorded an earmark in 1686.
Benjamin
Butcher, was the son of the Robert Butcher who died
in 1733.
John
Butcher ( - 1761), of Duck Creek Hundred, was a tenant
of Thomas Collins. His inventory was dated February
19, 1761. Account filed February 24, 1762, was submitted
by Thomas Murphey and Sarah, his wife, formerly Sarah
Butcher, administratrix of John Butcher, deceased. The
accounts were passed May 26, 1762.
Moses
Butcher ( -1749), was the son of Robert, Jr. who died
in 1733, and is named in his will.
The
administrator of his estate was also named Robert Butcher.
Moses
Butcher ( - 1822) of Little Creek Hundred was assessed
in 1782 as a Negro. In his will he named his wife Phoebe
and sons Henry and Whittington of New Castle County
and daughter Rebecca, wife of Isaac Macklin.
Robert
Butcher, Sr. ( -1731), of Little Creek Hundred, called
a yeoman, left a will in which he
named his son Robert, wife Susannah, son in law Richard
Pulling, and a person called Phillis Asco. Robert, his
son, is called a "laborer" in the bond, and Nicholas
Loockerman was the surety. The will was dated July 26,
1722, and the administration bond was dated 1731. Witnesses
to the will were Sarah Lowder, Ann Tilton, and John
Tilton. The administration bond was signed by Margaret
Shurmer, David Rees, and Nicholas Loockerman. In 1693
the Kent County court recorded an earmark for Robert
Butcher.
Robert
Butcher Jr. ( -1733) was the husband of Sarah, daughter
of the second Thomas Conselor. He left a 190-acre farm
to be equally divided among sons Moses Butcher, Benjamin,
and Robert Consealah. His will was made 14 November
1722 and proved in 1733. Witnesses were Grace Morgan
and Will Morgan.
Robert
Butcher ( - post 1749) administered the 1749 estate
of Moses Butcher. He signed the bond
with his mark.
Sarah
Butcher was the widow the Robert Butcher, whose will
was proved in 1733. She was the daughter named in the
will of Thomas Conselor who died in 1739.
Selah
Butcher ( -1795), of Little Creek Hundred, administration
granted in 1795 to Thomas
Butcher, who signed with his mark. The surety was Jesse
Dean, who signed his name.
Susannah
Butcher, widow of the Robert Butcher, Sr., who died
in 1731.
Thomas
Butcher was a witness to the will of Samuel Whitman
in 1776 of Kent County. Whitman was the last husband
of Agness, widow of John Loatman and William Sappington.
In 1786, Benjamin Durham petitioned the Court of Common
Pleas for permission to convey an acre that his father,
Daniel, had sold to Butcher. He signed his name to the
Whitman will. In the 1782 tax roll and the 1800 census,
he was identified as a Negro.
Thomas
Butcher ( - c. 1823) of Appoquinimink Hundred, New Castle
County, had a wife named Rachel. In 1795 he administered
the estate of Selah Butcher. His grandsons, Thomas Butcher
and Elias Conselor, inherited a five-acre lot in Little
Creek Hundred. He asked to be buried in the John Durham
burial ground near the present Bishop's Corner.
Thomas
S. Butcher was the administrator of the estate of Jesse
Dean, who died in 1839. There is a marriage bond of
a Thomas Butcher and Mariah Durham dated 1829.
Thomas
H. Butcher married Eliza Jane Morris in 1846.
Charles
Cambridge ( - 1806) was mentioned in the estate accounts
of Daniel Durham. His estate was administered by Walter
Douglass, and the people mentioned in his accounts apparently
are from southern Kent County. The largest item in his
estate account was with the ironworks firm of May and
Douglass. He owned two anvils, a bellows, steel, 15
bushels of charcoal, books, an oval tea table, and a
writing desk. The presence of blacksmith tools indicates
that, like Douglass, he was in the iron trade.
Mary
Cambridge was named as a legatee in the estate of Benjamin
Durham.
Sally
(Sarah) Ann Cambridge was the heir of Gilico Ann Handsor,
whose will was made in 1848.
William
Cambridge [Hunt] in 1748 patented a property called
Williams Choice, which was
expanded by an additional grant in 1754 from 60 to 128
acres. The property was part of the
recently vacated Askinabinikansen Indian Town, around
Nassawango Creek in Worcester County, Maryland. He was
described in the Worcester records as a mulatto. His
widow Esther and son Levin sold the farm in 1798.
William
Cambridge married Mary Dean, daughter of Hester Carney
and Jesse Dean.
Mary
Loatman Carey was daughter of John Loatman and sister
of Jeremiah Loatman. She
married Joseph Carey.
Robert
Carney, said to be from Sussex County, was a Methodist
class leader who led the
organization of Little Union Methodist Church, around
1850.
Sarah
Cork Carney, daughter of Perry Cork (d. 1833) predeceased
her father and left children
named Robert, Elizabeth, James, and William.
Thomas
Carney (c.1776 - ) Helped recover the body of Jesse
Dean after a tree fell on him in
1842.
Ann
Handsor Clark, wife of Miers Clark, was a daughter of
Thomas Handsor (d.1821).
Mary
Durham Clark, daughter of Elisha Durham, married George
Clark and inherited the
five-acre tract where her father's house stood near
Cheswold.
Thomas
Collins was landlord of John Butcher who died in 1761.
Thomas
Comerford was a creditor of John Sisco, whose wife's
share of the estate of John Durham
was assigned to Comerford.
Patrick
Conner of Pumpkin Neck married the daughter of the Widow
Axell and managed the
Bloomsbury property on several occasions. He went bond
on the estate of Thomas LaCount. He was also on the
bond of the administration of the estate of Sarah Axell
in 1782. He was related by marriage to the Allee family.
Benjamin
Conselor (c. 1778-1846) was named in the administration
papers of his father Elijah in 1801. His mother was
Hannah Durham, daughter of the elder John. He married
Rachel Sparksman and died at Salem, New Jersey in 1846.
They had three children. His son Elisha married Sarah
Sisco.
David
Conselor had an account at the Allee store in Smyrna
in 1811.
Eleanor
Conselor witnessed the will of John Durham the elder
in 1788.
Eleazer
Conselor was a grandson of Thomas Butcher of Appoquinimink
Hundred, named in his will probated in 1823.
Elijah
Conselor (1762-1801) of Duck Creek Hundred, son-in-law
of John Durham, obtained a tract of 50 acres from Francis
Denney, administrator of John Durham (deed book A-2,
page 155). In 1782, he was listed in the state census
with "N" after his name. His estate was administered
in 1801 by Hannah (widow) and Jeremiah, of Little Creek
Hundred. His estate was appraised on December 31, 1801.
Children were Jeremiah, Elijah, Sarah (Mrs. Debrix)
Miller, Elizabeth Conselor and Benjamin.
Elijah
Conselor ( -1826) was named in the 1812 final settlement
of his father, Elijah, who died in
1801. He was executor of the estate of Daniel Durham
in 1801. His estate was administered in
1826 by Elisha Durham, who signed his name, and by his
widow, Elizabeth Conselor, formerly his brother's widow,
who signed with a mark.
Elijah
Conselor was the son of Jeremiah Conselor (d. 1811).
He lived until after 1867
Elisha
Conselor (c. 1778-1864), son of Benjamin, married Sarah
Sisco. His son, Benjamin, died in Michigan in 1921,
and his death certificate listed him as "Ethiopian."
Elizabeth
Durham Conselor was the daughter of John Durham and
wife of Thomas Conselor,
named in her father's 1788 will.
Elizabeth
Conselor, widow of Jeremiah in 1811, married her brother-in-law
Elijah Conselor
before the estate was settled in 1814.
Hannah
Durham Conselor ( -1840), daughter of John Durham and
wife of Elijah Conselor,
named in her father's 1788 will, administator of her
husband's estate in 1801
Henrietta
Conselor, was the daughter of Jeremiah who died in 1811.
She died without issue
before reaching her majority.
Jemimah
Conselor (b. after 1797- ), was the daughter of Jeremiah
who died in 1811.
Jeremiah
Conselor (1779-1811) of Little Creek Hundred was named
in the settlement of the
estate of his father Elijah in 1801. He signed the administration
bond of Benjamin Durham's estate in
1810. His estate was administered in 1811-1814 by his
widow, Elizabeth, and by his brother Elijah
Conselor, who later married Elizabeth. Children were
Esther or Hester, who married first Jesse
Dean and then Elisha Durham; Elijah; Hannah, who married
Perry Cork; Henrietta; and Jemimah, all
of whom were below the age of 14 at the time of his
death. Henrietta and Jemimah died without
issue before obtaining their majority.
Jeremiah
Conselor married Mary and died about 1867. His brother
Elijah was his only surviving
sibling.
Johannah
Conselor was the widow of the Thomas who died in 1720.
John
Conselor (c. 1753 - 1849) is listed in 1782 in Murderkill
Hundred. He appears in the Allee
store accounts in association with Thomas Conselor of
Bloomsbury, who may have been his son. He
died in New Jersey at the age of 96, having lived there
for many years.
Mary
Conselor, daughter of Thomas, named in his will of 1739.
Mary
Conselor, wife of Thomas, witnessed John Durham's 1788
will.
Mary
Conselor (1792- wife of Thomas of Bloomsbury, accompanied
her son to Indiana, where
she died.
Margaret
Conselor married Handsor Durham, bond dated June 1,
1815
Rachel
Sparksman Conselor married Benjamin Conselor (c. 1778-1846)
and moved with him to
New Jersey.
Robert
Conselor was named in the will as the son of Robert
Butcher who died in 1733.
Thomas
Conselor (Gonseala) ( - c. 1720) was already a Kent
County resident in 1698 when he
bought 120 acres on the north side of Little Creek from
Griffith Jones. He recorded an earmark in
the court book April 30, 1700. The 1693 Kent assessment
mentions a 200 assessment in Little
Creek Hundred in the name of "Thomas Genssels for Griffith
Jones." William Morton in open court
recorded a conveyance from Griffith Jones to Thomas
Gonseala for 120 acres, described in Deed
Book C-1, page 243; and Thomas filed a suit against
Dennis Dyer (de Valinger 1959: 90, 150,
239). His letters of administration were granted to
his widow Joanna, August 6, 1720.
Thomas
Conselor ( -1739) His will, dated 26 September 1739,
was proved October 20, 1739.
He mentions a grandson, William Conselor, a daughter
Elizabeth Francisco, a daughter Sarah
Butcher (wife of Robert Butcher, Jr.) and a daughter,
Mary Conselor, who was to be sole executor
and virtually sole heir.
Thomas
Conselor, husband of Elizabeth, daughter of John Durham
(d.1788), is listed without racial
designation in the 1782 state census and is listed with
two nonwhites in his household in the 1800
federal census.
Thomas
Conselor (1784-1853) was born March 7, 1784. He was
the administrator of the estate
of Charles Durham in 1812. In 1805, he and his brother
offered to rent Hillyard's Adventure from
Ann Moore Ridgely for $200 a year. According to a letter
in the Ridgely papers, a "Mr. [William?]
Killen" reported that the brothers were "the only honest
tenants he ever had." His father (probably
John) had been a tenant on another Ridgely farm, possibly
Fox Hall in Murderkill Hundred. He was
the tenant on the Bloomsbury property until Abraham
Allee ejected him in 1814, and eventually
moved to New Jersey, where his children were born, beginning
in 1815. He died October 22,
1853, and is buried in the Baptist churchyard in Salem,
New Jersey.
Whittenton
Conselor was an heir of the William Conselor who died
in 1780.
William
Conselor ( -1780) letters of administration were issued
May 1, 1780 to John Durham,
who signed by a mark, and William Durham, who signed.
He and Daniel Durham were sureties for
Sarah Handsor and John Durham in the administration
of the estate of William Handsor. He was the grandson
of Thomas Conselor, and possibly the son of Mary Conselor.
His widow, Mary, was a
witness to John Durham's will. His will mentions supporting
Whittenton Conselor and William
Conselor.
William
Conselor was an heir of the William Conselor who died
in 1780.
Hannah
Conselor Cork, wife of Perry Cork, was the third child
of Jeremiah Conselor who died in
1801.
Perry
(Peregrine) Cork ( - 1833) of Duck Creek Hundred, was
survived by his son Perry and his
daughter Ann, wife of William Dean. Judging from his
inventory, he was probably a carpenter. His
daughter Sarah Carney had died and left four children
named Robert, Elizabeth, James and William
Carney.
Perry
(Peregrine) Cork (c. 1800 - 1865), son of Peregrine
Cork the elder, was said to have been
the last full-blooded Indian in Kent County, married
Hannah, daughter of Jeremiah Conselor. A
newspaper article dated 1943 contained a photograph
of his grandson, Perry Hughes, with his
hominy mortar, fashioned out of a gum log. His son John
married Mary Viney in 1857. His daughter
Harriet was born in 1834. His daughter Deborah married
John Hughes. His daughter Hester
(1841-1904) married James H. Munce in 1862.
William
Corse was a neighbor who inventoried Sarah Handsor's
estate in 1771.
Deborah
Durham Cott was named as a daughter of William Durham
in his estate settlement of
1797.
John
A. Cott (c. 1774 -1854) was the father of John D. Cott.
John
D. Cott (1804-1876) Married Sally Ann, the daughter
of Jesse Dean (d.1839). He dug the
grave of the Jesse Dean who died in 1842 when a tree
fell on him. His son was John Wesley Cott.
Lydia
Dean Cott (1844-1929) was a daughter of Jesse Dean (1804-1868).
She married John
Wesley Cott.
Sally
Ann Dean Cott (1813-1867) was a daughter of the Jesse
Dean who died in 1839 and wife
of John D. Cott.
Thomas
Cutler, who married Sara VanGaskin, was tenant on Bloomsbury
from about 1775 until
1801.
Ann
Cork Dean was wife of William Dean, married in 1824.
David
Dean (before 1775-1827) appears in the 1820 Murderkill
Hundred census with three in his
household.
Elizabeth
Durham Dean, wife of the elder Jesse, was the daughter
of William Durham the
younger, named in his 1797 estate account.
Enoch
Dean was the son of Jesse Dean (d.1868).
Hester
Carney Dean was the wife of Jesse Dean the younger.
James
Dean ( - 1720) left a widow Mary, who died the following
year.
James
Dean (before 1740 - 1787) appears on the Kent County
tax list by 1755. He bought land
from Jeremiah Rees of Little Creek Hundred. He married
Sarah Hewes, daughter of Isabel Hewes,
who died in 1757. In the 1782 state census he was shown
without racial designation. He appears in
the estate accounts of neighbor Samuel Whitman in 1783.
He wrote his will in 1787 and signed with
a very shaky hand. His wife, Sarah, and his daughter,
Rebecca, were to share the house by the great
road, and his son Jesse was to receive land on the east
side of the road. Jesse was to receive the
property after the death of his wife and daughter. There
was also a daughter Keziah.
James
Dean (before 1775 - ) appears in the 1798 tax list with
three acres in Little Creek
Hundred. In the 1820 census he is in Duck Creek Hundred
as a head of household.
Jeremiah
Dean was the son of Jesse Dean and his wife Hester,
daughter of Jeremiah Conselor
who later married Elisha Durham. He was born between
1814 and 1818.
Jesse
Dean ( - pre 1818) in 1814 married Hester, daughter
of Jeremiah Conselor, who bore a son
Jeremiah
Dean. After his death, Hester married Elisha Durham.
Jesse
Dean ( - 1839) signed the administrtion bond of Thomas
Butcher on the estate of Selah
Butcher. He inherited land from his father, James, in
1793. His first wife, Elizabeth, was the daughter
of William Durham, and is named in his 1797 estate account.
In the 1800 federal census he is listed
with five nonwhites in his household. He died in 1839,
leaving sons William and Jesse and a daughter
Sally Ann (1813-1867), who married John Cott (1804-1876).
He states in the will that his sons are
not legitimate because they were born before his marriage
to their mother, Rebecca. He also married
Esther Conselor, mother of Elijah Conselor. The administrator
of his estate was Thomas S. Butcher.
Jesse
Dean ( - 1842) was killed when a tree fell on him. His
household included Fanny Jackson,
housekeeper. The administrator of his estate was Thomas
[S.?] Butcher.
Jesse
Dean (1804 -1868), son of the Jesse who died in 1839,
married Hester Carney. They had
eight children.
John
Dean (c. 1826 - ) of Smyrna was identified as being
"of Indian descent" on a passport
application in 1853.
Robert
Dean was the son of Jesse Dean (d.1868).
Sarah
Dean was the daughter of Isabel Hewes and wife of James
Dean.
Keziah
Dean was the daughter of James Dean and sister of the
elder Jesse, mentioned in the James
Dean will of 1787.
William
Dean (c. 1803 - ), son of the Jesse Dean (d. 1839),
married Ann Cork in 1824. With their
six children they were shown in the 1850 census).
William
Dean was the son of Jesse Dean (d.1868), and died before
his father. He left children
named Josiah, Ellen, and Mary.
Francis
Denney (1738 - 1812) was the executor of the estate
of John Durham in 1788 and owner
of the Bloomsbury property when John Sisco and Thomas
Conselor were tenants there. He was the
first husband of Sarah Nash, and son of Philip Denney
III of Benefield. Abraham Allee was his
son-in-law. He also conducted the evaluation of John
Allee's holdings, including Bloomsbury,
1787-1791.
John
Denney, with George Hall, appraised the estate of Gilico
(Angelica) Hansor in 1852.
Thomas
Denney appraised the estate of William Durham in 1797
and the estate of Benjamin
Durham in 1810. He bought part of Jolley's Neck from
Benjamin Wells in 1802.
Hester
Durham Driggus. wife of David Driggus, was a daughter
of Elisha Durham who died in
1864
Benjamin
Durham is buried at Fork Branch churchyard. In 1863
he conveyed his home place,
now the Dover Products Company and an original part
of Jolley's Neck, to Mary Shores. He died
25 years later, leaving his widow, Sarah A., and children
Margaret Norwood, Daniel Durham,
Enoch
Durham, Jeremiah Durham, Henrietta Morgan, Amanda Salmon
(Sammons), Clem Durham, Mariah Durham, and Harvey Durham.
Benjamin
Durham ( -1810) of St. Jones Hundred, was the son of
Daniel Durham who died in
1786. His deed, as his father's administrator, to Thomas
Butcher, was witnessed by Brinckle Roe
and Mark McCall. In the 1800 federal census he was listed
with eight nonwhites in his household.
He signed his name with a firm hand. He left a widow
Elizabeth. Thomas Denney and Lewis Gano
appraised the estate. The administration bond was signed
February 8, 1810 by Elizabeth, Daniel
Durham, Jeremiah Conselor, and John Hughes, all of whom
signed by marks. There was a payment
to Mary Cambridge in the disbursements. The 1805 assessment
calls him a Negro and the 1810
census identifies him as a mulatto.
Charles
Durham ( -1812) died in 1812. His administrator was
Thomas Conselor, and Thomas
Hawkins went his bond.
Clayton
Durham received a legacy in the will of John Durham
the elder who died in 1788.
Daniel
Durham ( - 1786) left a wife Eleanor who administered
with his son Benjamin in 1786.
Daniel
Durham was listed in the 1744 and subsequent Little
Creek Hundred assessments. In 1783,
he agreed to sell an acre on the west side of the great
road to Thomas Butcher. He died before the
last payment was made, and his son Benjamin petitioned
the court for permission to make a deed.
John Huse and Thomas Keith witnessed the agreement.
The will was written 7 December 1779. His
sons were Daniel, Benjamin, and Thomas. His six daughters
named in the estate records were
Joannah, Hester, Rachel, Mary, Elliner, and Sarah. The
will mentions a servant boy named George
who was to serve to the age of 21 years. Thomas Keith,
Joseph Smith and James Wells were
witnesses. Thomas Keith and Stephen Mercer made the
inventory. Accounts mention Charles
Cambridge, James Harmon, and Labellow Hansor.
Daniel
Durham ( - 1801) estate probate in 1801, will written
in 1795 mentions a wife Unice or
Nicey who later married Griffin Bass. Elijah Conselor
was executor. Lewis Gano and Benjamin
Durham were witnesses to the will. Peter Stout went
bond for the administration of his estate. Sons
were Hugh, Parker, and Joseph. Daughters were Hannah
and Sarah. By the time the estate was
settled, Hannah was called "Williams," indicating that
she had married.
Daniel
Durham ( - c. 1815) son of Daniel (d. 1786) was one
of the sureties on the administration
bond of his brother Benjamin Durham in 1810. In his
noncupative will of 1815, transcribed by John
McCoy, he ordered that his estate be divided between
his sister Elizabeth and his half-sisters
Hannah and Eleanor. Hugh Durham was his administrator,
and the inventory was made by Benjamin
Simpson and Abraham Barber. He was identified in the
1805 and 1815 assessments as a Negro
and as a mulatto in the 1810 assessment.
David
West Durham was a son of Elisha Durham, named in his
will of 1864.
Eleanor
Durham was the wife of Daniel Durham (d.1786).
Eleanor
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham (d.1786) and
was half-sister of Daniel Durham
(d. 1815).
Elijah
Durham was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham. After
his father's death, about 1801, his
mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Elijah
Durham, son of Elisha Durham, predeceased his father,
who died in 1864. His children were
named in their grandfather's will, as Isaiah, Elijah,
and Mary.
Elisha
Durham (c.1794-1864) married Hester or Esther, daughter
of Jeremiah Conselor and
widow of Jesse Dean, who bore him ten children, one
of whom died in infancy. He left a widow
Priscilla in a will he signed. He owned 15 acres on
the road from Dover to Kenton purchased of
John Moore. The will mentions a grandson Robert John
Durham, son of his daughter Elizabeth
Williams, wife of Baynham Williams of New Jersey. To
his daughter Mary Clark, wife of George
Clark, he left the five acres where his house stood.
The will mentions a share to the heirs of his son
Elijah, deceased, who were minors named Isaiah, Elijah,
and Mary Catherine. Other children were
sons Joel Durham, Isaac Durham, Elisha West Durham,
John West Durham, David West Durham, and Hester who
was the wife of David Driggus.
Elisha
West Durham was a son of Elisha Durham, named in his
will of 1864. He was a trustee of
Manship Methodist Church in 1886.
Elizabeth
Conselor Durham ( - 1815) daughter of Elijah Conselor
and his wife Hannah Durham,
was named in her father's estate papers in 1801. She
married John Durham; their sons were Ezekiel
and Enoch. Their daughter Mary died young.
Elizabeth
Durham daughter of Daniel Durham (d. 1786) was full
sister of Daniel Durham (d. 1815)
and half-sister of Hannah and Eleanor Durham.
Elizabeth
Handsor Durham, daughter of William Handsor, was the
wife of Benjamin Durham of
St. Jones Hundred who died in 1810. She died before
1816, when Handsor Durham made a deed
for her dower lands. She was identified as a mulatto
by the county assessor.
Elizabeth
Hewes Durham was the wife of John Durham the elder and
daughter of Isabel Hewes.
They were married before 1756, when they both signed
a deed.
George
Durham ( - 1845) was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham.
He was tenant on the Henry
M. Ridgely farm, Fox Hall. After his father's death,
about 1801, his mother remarried John Francisco
(Sisco) of Bloomsbury. His wife was Susan, who received
a bequest from the estate of
Esther Sisco in 1815. A tombstone at Manship Church
records Rev. William Durham, son of
George and Susan Durham, 1819-1857. Other children were
the infant son Isaac, and sons Henry
and Elijah. His daughters were Rebecca and Hannah Jane.
His will also mentions John Hanzer, an
orphan boy he had raised. Cornelius Handsor witnessed
the will by making his mark.
Handsor
Durham, son of Benjamin Durham, married Margaret Conselor
in 1815. In 1816, they
conveyed to Hugh Durham his mother's dower in the estate
of her grandfather Nehemiah Handsor.
Margaret and Handsor signed by marks.
Hannah
Durham was half-sister of Daniel Durham (d. 1815).
Hester
Conselor Dean Durham (post 1794-1840) daughter of the
Jeremiah Conselor who died
in 1811. She married first Jesse Dean in 1814, who predeceased
her, and then Elisha Durham. Her
surviving children were Jeremiah Dean, Joel Durham,
Isaac Durham, Elijah Durham, John Durham, Elizabeth
Durham Williams, David Durham, Mary Durham Clark, Hester
Durham Driggus, and Ann Durham.
Hester
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1786.
Hester
Sisco Durham married Whittington Durham in 1817.
Hugh
Durham was the son of Daniel Durham who died in 1801.
He received six acres by deed
from Handsor Durham in 1816. He signed the administration
bond on the estate of James Handsor
in 1819. The 1805 and 1830 assessments define him as
a Negro, but the 1815 assessment identifies
him as a mulatto.
Isaac
Durham was a son of Hester and Elisha Durham.
Isabella
Durham was the daughter of William Durham who died in
1797.
Isaiah
Durham was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham. After
his father's death, about 1801, his
mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Isaiah
Durham ( - 1801), son of John Durham the elder, left
nine children: Pheby, William, Elijah,
Margaret, Isaiah, Rebecca, Jeremiah, John, and George.
His estate inventory made May 6, 1801
showed a value of 195/11/10, and the widow's third was
35/11/0. His widow was Maria, who
administered the estate, and her bondsman was William
VanStarvon of Little Creek Hundred. Mary
signed by her mark and William signed his name. Mary,
or Maria, later married John Francisco.
When Maria remarried John Sisco, VanStarvon complained
that the new husband was a "mulatto"
and demanded to be released from his bond.
Jeremiah
Durham was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham. After
his father's death, about 1801,
his mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Joannah
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1786.
Joel
Durham (1818- ) was a son of Hester and Elisha Durham.
He married a daughter of Robert
Munce
John
Durham was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham. After
his father's death, about 1801, his
mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco). A John Durham
"n" appears in the 1800 census for
Carroll Town Neck with three nonwhites in his household.
He married Sarah, daughter of William
Durham.
John
Durham married Elizabeth, daughter of Elijah Conselor,
who bore three children: Ezekiel,
Enoch, and Mary. This probably is the John Durham who
helped dig the grave of Jesse Dean in
1842
John
Durham ( before 1733 - 1788) was the son-in-law of Isabel
Hewes, and is named in her
will. Administered William Conselor's estate in 1780.
Apparently anticipating his death in 1788, he
conveyed tracts in the present Cheswold area to his
sons-in-law. He signed his April 1788 will with
a mark. It was proved May 14. Robert Holliday was named
executor. His sons were William, Isaiah
and Whittington. Daughters were Sarah Sisco, Letitia
La Count, wife of Thomas, Elizabeth
Conselor, wife of Thomas, and Hannah Conselor (wife
of Elijah). Mary Conselor and Eleanor
Puckham witnessed the will. People mentioned in the
estate account included John Cott, Ephraim
Francisco, William Songo, Daniel Songo, Jesse Dean,
Mary Conselor, Robert Durham, Elijah
Conselor, and Stephen Sparksman.
John
Durham, Jr. ( -1776), died young, and his father, John,
administered his estate. Whittington
and Daniel Durham went bond for the administration.
His daughter Hannah married Elijah Conselor.
John West Durham was a son of Elisha Durham, named in
his will of 1864.
Joseph
Durham was a son of Thomas, who died in 1795.
Joseph
Durham was a son of Daniel Durham who died in 1801.
Margaret
Durham was the daughter of Maria and Isaiah Durham.
After her father's death, about
1801, her mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Mariah
Durham married Thomas Butcher in 1829.
Mary
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1786.
Parker
Durham was the son of Daniel Durham who died in 1801.
Pheby
Durham was the daughter of Maria and Isaiah Durham.
After her father's death, about
1801, her mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Pierce
Durham married Ann Hewes in 1824.
Priscilla
Durham was the widow of Elisha Durham who died in 1864.
Rachel
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1786.
Rebecca
Durham was the daughter of Maria and Isaiah Durham.
After her father's death, about
1801, her mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco).
Robert
John Durham was the son of Elizabeth Williams, who was
the wife of Baynham Williams
of New Jersey. He is mentioned in the 1864 will of her
father, Elisha Durham.
Ruth
Durham was the widow of Whittington, who died circa
1793.
Sarah
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1786.
Sarah
Durham was a daughter of Thomas, who died in 1795.
Sarah
Durham was a daughter of Daniel Durham who died in 1801.
Sarah
Durham, wife of John Durham, was the daughter of William
Durham who died in 1797.
Susan
Durham ( - post 1815) was the daughter of Rachel Handsor,
according to her 1815 estate
papers. Her husband was George Durham, according to
the estate papers of Esther Sisco, also
dated 1815.
Thomas
Durham ( -1795) left a widow named Mary when he died
in 1795. He was the son of
Eleanor and Daniel Durham (d. 1786). His administrator
was Thomas Hughes and his children were
Joseph, Sarah, Whittington, and Thomas. Mary Durham,
widow of Thomas was shown with one
nonwhite in her household in the 1800 census, which
indicates that she was living alone without her
children. The estate was finally distributed in 1805.
She later married Thomas Hughes.
Thomas
Durham was the son of Thomas Durham (d. 1795).
Whittington
Durham was the son of Thomas Durham (d. 1795) and grandson
of the Daniel
Durham who died in 1786. In 1817 he married Hester Sisco.
Whittington
Durham ( - 1793) son of John Durham the elder and Elizabeth
Hewes Durham, died
about 1793, leaving a wife named Ruth who renounced
her right to administer the estate, which was
administered by James Morris. The inventory was valued
at 132/10/3. Heirs were Benjamin and
Isabelle.
William
Durham was the son of William named in his father's
estate's 1797-1805 papers. He is
listed in the 1800 census of Little Creek Hundred as
a white person.
William
Durham was the son of Maria and Isaiah Durham. After
his father's death, about 1801, his
mother remarried John Francisco (Sisco). Benjamin Francisco
(Sisco) and William are mentioned in
the estate papers of Jeremiah Conselor in 1811.
William
Durham ( - 1797) was a son of John Durham the elder.
He signed a bond May 1, 1780
appraisal.
Rev.
William Durham (1819-1857) was the son of George and
Susan Durham. He
is buried at Manship Church.
Joseph
Farrow was the appraiser of Cornelius Handsor's estate
in 1814, with Andrew Naudain. His wife's sister was
married to William Van Stavoren, who went bond for Maria
Durham's administration of her husband Isaiah's estate.
Farrow's Meeting House, later replaced by Bethel Methodist
Church, was established in his home in 1780. His property
lay in the southwest corner of the intersection of the
Fast Landing Road and the State Road, now known as Bishop's
Corner.
Jane
Handsor Foster wife of Woolsey Foster, was daughter
of Thomas Handsor (d. 1821).
Catherine
Francisco (Sisco) was the widow of John Sisco's unnamed
brother, mentioned in his 1756 petition.
Charles
Francisco (Sisco) ( - 1798) of Little Creek Neck, signed
his name to his will. He is listed without racial designation
in the 1782 assessment of Little Creek Hundred. Cornelius
Van Stavoren was a witness of the will. The inventory
of his house describes six rooms, a kitchen, and a cellar.
His father was John Francisco, son-in-law of John Durham
the elder. His sister Lydia was his executrix who filed
papers in 1798, but Elizabeth Francisco eventually administered
both estates after Lydia died. He was executor of his
father, John Francisco. At the time of Charles' settlement,
his father's estate was still worth 888/12/4.75, and
his own inventory was 706/5/2.5. The final account was
passed November 1800.
Daniel
Francisco (Sisco) appears in the 1733 Little Creek assessment
with a value of 12/8/0
David
Francisco (Sisco) ( - c. 1732) died around 1732. An
inventory dated 22 September 1732 survives at the archives
in the form of a copy made in 1752 for unknown purpose.
The estate was valued at 27/1/6. Thomas Irons and William
Maxwell made the inventory.
Elizabeth
Conselor Francisco (Sisco) was the daughter of Thomas
Conselor who died in 1739. She may have been David's
widow.
Elizabeth
Francisco (Sisco) was daughter of Lydia Francisco (Sisco).
Ephraim
Francisco (Sisco) paid 40 to the estate of Samuel Whitman
of Little Creek Neck in 1784. He is listed without race
designation in the 1782 Little Creek Hundred census.
He is mentioned in the 1788 will of John Durham.
Esther
Francisco (Sisco) ( - c. 1811) of Little Creek Hundred,
a "free woman of color" made her will "3rd day 12th
month 1810," which indicates she may have been a Quaker
or at least Quaker educated. Her 1811 inventory describes
her estate as worth $96, including "a lot of books."
She was the daughter of John Francisco and granddaughter
of John Durham. Witnesses to the administration were
John McCoy and John Sanders.
Esther
Francisco (Sisco) ( - c. 1815) signed her will by mark
in 1815. She gave all her personal estate and four and
a quarter acres of land to Angelica (Gelico) Lockerman.
The will mentions a payment to Susan Durham, George
Durham's wife.
George
Francisco (Sisco) ( - 1814) signed his will 10 November
1814, and it was proved 21 November. Luke Rickards apparently
wrote the will. His administrator was William Sisco,
his brother, and Abraham Allee was surety. He mentions
his brother William and his sister Emilia Handsor as
his heirs. The inventory includes a loom and a warping
mill.
Hannah
Francisco (Sisco) was named as the widow of William,
of Appoquinimink Hundred, who died in 1829
John
Francisco (Sisco) petitioned the Kent County Orphans
Court February 26, 1756, stating that his brother had
died "some years ago," leaving an infant. His brother's
widow, Catherine, also had died and the child was in
the care of John "Swaney," who is unable to care for
it. John asks, and receives, permission to take the
child. He was listed in the 1744 and 1755 Little Creek
Hundred assessment lists.
John
Francisco (Sisco) ( - 1791) married the daughter of
John Durham the elder, Sarah. In the 1782 assessment
he is shown without a racial designation. He died in
1791. His son, Charles, was his executor. The estate
was valued at 942/6/3. The children were Esther, Lydia
and Charles. Elizabeth, Lydia's daughter, filed as administratrix
DBN in 1798, after Lydia and Charles were dead. She
was also executrix of Lydia, who was executrix of Charles,
who had been John's executor.
John
Francisco (Sisco) is listed with seven nonwhites in
his household on the 1800 census. He married the widow
of Isaiah Durham, about 1803. In the 1803 assessment
he is named as Francis Denney's tenant on 134 acres
of the Bloomsbury tract.
Lydia
Francisco (Sisco) ( -1798) of Little Creek Neck, signed
her will with a mark 7 November 1798. She left all her
estate and the residue of her father's estate to her
daughter Elizabeth Francisco. When the papers were filed
December 18, 1798, Elizabeth signed the bond herself.
The inventory, taken in 1799, describes a walnut desk
with cash therein, a woman's saddle, a half dozen silver
teaspoons, earthen and queens ware, and a "boy's time."
The estate was valued at 157/7/8. Her father's estate
was valued at 430/12/5
Maria
Durham Francisco (Sisco), widow of Isaiah Durham, married
John Francisco before 1803. She appears in the 1800
Little Creek Hundred census with ten nonwhites in her
household
Mary
Francisco (Sisco) ( -1809) died in 1809, the date when
interest began on a debt owed by James Selby to her
estate, which was settled in 1817.
Patience
Francisco (Sisco) was the widow of Thomas Francisco,
who died about 1748.
Rachel
Francisco (Sisco) was the wife of Isaiah, who died around
1826. Her administrator was Thomas Carney of Appoquinimink
Hundred and his surety was Simon Sherman.
Sarah
Durham Francisco (Sisco), daughter of John Durham, is
named in her father's 1788 will, married John Francisco
(Sisco)
Thomas
Francisco (Sisco) ( - 1748) was the husband of Patience,
who was his executrix. His inventory is dated July 14,
1748. The estate settlement accounts are dated 1750.
The accounts mention John Francisco, Elizabeth Francisco,
and Daniel Durham. Witnesses to the will were Frances
and James Keith and John Houseman.
William
Francisco (Sisco) ( - 1829) was the brother of Emilia
(Amelia) Handsor and George Francisco. An administrtion
account in Appoquinimink Hundred mentions a widow Hannah
and six children.
Lewis
Gano appraised the estate of William Durham in 1797
and the estate of Benjamin Durham in 1813. The Gano
family were well-known Baptists at the time. Lewis and
Ruth Gano witnessed the will of Nehemiah Handsor in
1785. In 1797, Lewis Gano married Sarah Pearson. Jehu
Gray was a witness to the 1776 will of Samuel Whitman.
Benjamin Greenage ( - 1865) married Rachel, daughter
of Deberix Miller. His estate was distributed in 1867,
but the widow's dower was not settled until her death
and the estate was closed 1 September 1898. Children
were Josiah, James, John, Washington, Frances and Ann.
Rachel
Miller Greenage daughter of Deberix Miller was the wife
of Benjamin Greenage.
George
Hall, with John Denney, appraised the estate of Gilico
Hansor in 1852.
Alexander
Handsor was the son of Thomas Handsor (d. 1821) of Sussex
County.
Amelia
(Emilia) Francisco Handsor was the sister of George
Francisco, who died in November 1814. Another of her
brothers was William Francisco.
Aminidab
Handsor (c. 1664 - ) was born c. 1664, possibly in Accomack
County, Virginia. He was in Sussex County by 1679. In
1683 he recorded a cattle earmark. He was referred to
in 1687 as "Hanger Alias Hamsworth." In 1688 he married
Rose [Matthews?]. Their children were Aminidab, Samuel,
Ann, and Mary. A document filed in 1773 is the earliest
one that describes him as a mulatto. He is thought to
have been the father of William of Jolley's Neck, on
the basis of William's frequent association in legal
documents with Samuel.
Aminidab
Handsor (c. 1688 - 1717), son of Aminidab and Rose,
was born January 23, 1688/9. He died in 1717 and left
his parents, brother Samuel, and sisters Ann and Mary.
Ann
Handsor was the daughter of Aminidab and Rose Handsor.
Bridget
Handsor was the widow of William.
Cornelius
Handsor, son of William of Jolley's Neck, inherited
the patented lands from his father. His mother was Mary
Handsor. In 1773 he conveyed the southeastern part to
his half-brother Nehemiah.
Cornelius
Handsor ( - c. 1814), described as a mulatto in his
estate papers, died around 1814. The 1800 census describes
his household with five nonwhites. His administrator
was William Collins. His possessions included a hominy
mortar valued at only twenty cents but listed separately.
Joseph Farrow and Andrew Naudain made the appraisal.
Eleanor
Handsor was identified as the daughter of the Thomas
Handsor who died in 1821. Elizabeth Handsor was a granddaughter
of named in his 1785 will. When she was 14, she chose
William Pierce as her guardian. Joshua Fisher, counsel
for Saunders Oakey, objected and Pierce was removed.
Gilico
(Angelica) Ann Handsor ( - c. 1852) received a bequest
from Esther Sisco in 1815. She married first John Loockerman.
She described Sally A. Cambridge as "a girl I raised"
in her 1848 will. The will was drafted by Elisha Durham
and witnessed by James Carney and George Hall. The appraisal
was carried out in 1852 by John Denney and George Hall.
She conveyed to William Durham a lot at the fork bridge
in 1848. In 1856 William and his wife Mahala conveyed
it to John Kimmey. As administrator, William Durham
conveyed a tract to Elisha Durham.
James
Handsor ( - 1819) died about 1819, leaving a widow Ann,
who administered the estate. He was a tenant of Thomas
Denney, on whose ground he had a corn crop at the time
of his demise. Hugh Durham was surety for the administration
bond. He was identified as a mulatto by the assessor.
Jemima
Handsor was a daughter of William, named in the 1785
will of her grandfather, Nehemiah I.
Johannah
Handsor was the widow of Nehemiah Handsor who died in
1785. She later married Saunders Oakey.
John
Handsor was the son of Thomas Handsor (d. 1821) of Sussex
County.
Jonathan
Handsor, son of William, inherited his grandmother's
iron pot and served in the Revolution.
Mary
Handsor was daughter of Aminidab and Rose Handsor.
Mary
Handsor was the second wife of William Handsor and mother
of Cornelius.
Mary
Butcher Handsor Married Peregrine Handsor in 1812 in
Kent County.
Naomi
Handsor, daughter of William, died before the estate
was settled.
Nehemiah
Handsor ( -1785), son of William Handsor, born about
1716-1720, appears in the tax list for Sussex County
in 1739. Made his will in 1785. Witnesses were Lewis
and Ruth Gano and Daniel Billiler. To his son Nehemiah
he left property in tail. His other son was William.
His wife Johannah and Peter Miller, Sr., were named
executors. He left the west part of the property to
his widow Johnannah in trust for granddaughters Elizabeth
and Jemima.
Nehemiah
Handsor received a farm through the will of his father,
Nehemiah, dated 1785.
Nehemiah
Handsor was a brother of the elder Peregrine Handsor,
named in the 1821 will of his father, Thomas Handsor
of Sussex County.
Peregrine
Handsor, Sr. (1792 - ) was born 5 February 1792 and
baptised August 12, 1792 in St. George's Chapel, son
of Thomas (d. 1821) and Priscilla Handsor. He married
Mary Butcher of Kent County in 1812, according to a
marriage bond countersigned by William K. Lockwood.
Peregrine
Handsor, Jr. (1822 - ) of Appoquinimink Hundred was
born about 1822, married Sarah Sammons, daughter of
Benjamin, and moved to Canada. The 1850 United States
census lists children Sarah, Prudence, Henry and Nancy.
There were ten children in all, born both in the United
States and in Canada. A son, William, lived in Wallaceburg,
Ontario, in later years.
Priscilla
Handsor was the wife of Thomas and the mother of Peregrine,
Sr.
Rachel
Handsor, daughter of William and Sarah Handsor, inherited
one seventh part of her father's estate. Her sisters
Naomi and Rhoda died while John Durham was serving as
her guardian and renting the family farm from the estate.
An account was finally settled in 1793 by Francis Denney.
Rachel
Handsor died about 1815. She was called a mulatto widow
in the
1804
tax list. Hugh Durham was her administrator. His sureties
were Susan Durham and Angelica Lockerman. Susan Durham
was Rachel's daughter, and shared the estate equally
with George Puckham.
Samuel
Handsor was the son of Rose and Aminidab Handsor. In
1733 he sold land to John Overton of Somerset County
that he had bought from the estate of Aminidab Oakey.
Sarah
Durham Handsor ( - c. 1771) third wife of William Handsor,
patentee of Jolley's Neck, died around 1771, and her
brother John Durham was her administrator, but the final
account was not passed on the estate until Francis Denney,
John Durham's administrator, passed it in 1793. William
Corse and John Torbert appraised her estate February
9, 1771.
Sarah
Sammons Handsor ( - 1894) daughter of Benjamin Sammons,
married Peregrine Handsor, Jr., and moved with him to
Dover East, Ontario, Canada.
Susannah
Handsor was named as a daughter of William Durham in
the 1797 administration of his estate.
Thomas
Handsor ( - 1821) of Sussex County probably was the
son of William, and grandson of William of Jolley's
Neck. His will was probated in Sussex May 18, 1821.
His sons were "Peary" (Peregrine), John, Alexander,
Nehemiah, and William. His daughters were Sarah Lack,
Jane Foster (wife of Woolsey), and Ann Clark (wife of
Miers). Grandchildren were Elija Rigawah, Jesse Handsor,
Nathaniel Handsor, and Cornelia Handsor. His wife was
Elizabeth.
William
Handsor ( -1767) Moved to Kent County from Sussex County
until 1735, when he patented Jolley's Neck in Kent County.
He left a widow, Sarah, and minor children to be cared
for by John Durham, her brother. He signed his own will
when he made it in 1756. His son Cornelius, by his earlier
wife Mary, received his land in Kent County. His son
William received his gun. His son Jonathan received
his grandmother's iron pot. His son Nehemiah was to
receive his shoemaker's tools. Witnesses to the will
were John Darling, Esther Darling, and Hannah French.
The administration bond was signed by Daniel Durham
and William Conselor.
William
Handsor ( - 1801) was the son of William Handsor the
patentee of Jolley's Neck. His wife's name was Jane,
named in his will dated 26 October 1784. He died in
Sussex County in 1801, and named three sons, David,
Thomas and Peter, four grandsons, Aaron, Thomas, Nehemiah,
and William, and three granddaughters Elise, Isabel,
and Cary. Other legatees were Elizabeth Roads, Agnes
Hanzer, Easter Hanser, Jane Rigeworth, and Ann Salmons.
William
Handsor ( - 1784) son of Nehemiah I, was the father
of Jemima and Elizabeth. He died in 1784. His widow's
name was Bridget. Two inventories were taken, one by
William Rigway and Burton Waples, the other by William
Butcher and James Wilkins. These may have been first
in Sussex and then in Kent.
William
Handsor, brother of Peregrine and son of Thomas was
named in his father's 1821 will and his grandfather's
1801 will.
Gabriel
Harmon received Rhoda Handsor's share of the estate
of her father, William.
Peter
Hawkins took the inventory of the estate of Thomas LaCount
with Robert Thompson.
Robert
Holliday was originally named to be the executor of
John Durham's 1788 will, but Francis Denney eventually
administered it.
John
Houseman witnessed the 1748 will of Thomas Francisco.
Benjamin
Hugh (Hewes) in 1829 married Maria, daughter of Deberix
Miller, and was father of John and Rachel.
Isabel
Hughes ( - c. 1763) of Little Creek Hundred made her
will in 1757. It was probated January 19, 1763. She
named a son, John Hughes and a son-in-law John Durham,
in her will. Her daughter Sarah was her executrix, and
she married James Dean before filing the final papers
on her estate. Sarah was also the major legatee. Inventory
was taken by John Rees and Robert Arthurs. She may have
been the same Isabel Hughes who attended the birth of
Caesar Rodney in 1728 (Hancock 1962:37).
John
Hughes was the son of Isabel Hews (Hughes) and brother-in-law
to both John Durham and James Dean. He was one of the
signers of the administration bond on the estate of
Benjamin Durham in 1810. He witnessed Daniel Durham's
contract to sell an acre to Thomas Butcher.
John
Hughes (Hews) was the son of the deceased daughter of
Deberix Miller, named in his 1841 will.
Maria
Miller Hughes (Hewes) ( - before 1841), daughter of
Deberix, married Benjamin Hughes and died before 1841,
leaving children John and Rachel.
Mary
Durham Hughes, wife of Thomas Hughes and earlier widow
of Thomas Durham, was named as a daughter of William
Durham in his estate administration of 1797.
Rachel
Hughes (Hews) was the daughter of the deceased daughter
of Deberix Miller, named in his 1841 will.
Thomas
Hughes was administrator of the estate of Thomas Durham,
1795, which was distributed in 1805. His wife was Mary
Durham, daughter of William Durham and widow of Thomas
Durham, who he married about 1800.
Frances
Jackson (c. 1798- ) was the housekeeper for Jesse Dean
when he was killed by a falling tree in 1742.
Griffith
Jones was the original owner of the Gonseala farm.
James
Keith and Frances Keith witnessed the 1748 will of Thomas
Francisco.
Thomas
Keith was surety for Margaret Murphey when she administered
the estate of Thomas Murphey. He witnessed Daniel Durham's
contract to sell an acre to Thomas Butcher.
Rebecca
Dean Kimmey was a daughter of Jesse Dean (1804-1868)
and wife of John Kimmey.
Sarah
Handsor Lack was the daughter of Thomas Handsor (d.
1821).
Letitia
Durham LaCount was a daughter of John Durham the Elder,
named in his 1788 will, and wife of Thomas LaCount.
Thomas
LaCount ( - 1796) of Duck Creek Hundred died in 1796.
Hester LaCount signed the renunciation with a mark.
William LaCount, his son, administered the estate. Patrick
Conner went bond, which he signed January 12, 1796.
Peter Hawkins and Robert Thompson made the inventory.
William
LaCount was a son of Thomas and grandson of John Durham.
Robert
Leatham married Letitia Durham, 1827.
Philip
Lewis was one of the sureties on the administration
bond of the estate of John Loatman in 1747.
Alexander
Loatman was son of John Loatman and brother of Jeremiah
Loatman. When he conveyed his part of the New Years
Chance tract to Abraham Moor in 1758 he referred to
himself as a shoemaker.
Benjamin
Loatman ( - 1768) died in 1768, and his widow Ann renounced
administration of the estate. The administrator was
Jonathan Allee and John Allee was surety. John Vangaskin
and Jonathan Raymond made the inventory.
Elizabeth
Loatman was a daughter of Jeremiah and Agness Loatman.
She witnessed the 1776 will of Samuel Whitman and signed
with a mark.
Hester
(or Esther) Loatman was the widow of John who died c.
1747.
Hester
Loatman was a daughter of Jeremiah and Agness Loatman.
Jacob
Loatman (c. 1705 - ) was a longtime resident of Pumpkin
Neck in 1767, according to depositions taken in 1785.
He was born about 1705. Thomas Tilton called him a "poor
and inoffensive man."
Jeremiah
Loatman ( - c. 1761), son of John Loatman of Kent County,
died around 1761, and his wife very soon remarried William
Sappington. Samuel Whitman went bond for the widow,
Agness, as administrator. Accounts of Alexander Loatman
are found in the estate papers. Children were Elizabeth,
Susannah, Martha, and Hester. He signed his name to
his father's administration account.
John
Loatman ( - c. 1747) was the father of Jeremiah Loatman
and a yeoman farmer on the main branch of St. Jones
River. He bought 100 acres from Nicholas Powel in 1739.
When his estate was settled in 1747, his widow Esther
and his son Jeremiah were administrators. His children
sold his land to Abraham Moore in 1757. His children
were Jeremiah Loatman, who married Agness; Mary, wife
of Joseph Carey; Elizabeth, wife of George Steward [Howard?],
and Alexander. The administrator's bond on his estate
was dated 12 March 1747. His widow, Esther or Hester,
signed with a mark. Sureties were Philip Lewis and William
Rees.
Martha
Loatman was a daughter of Jeremiah and Agness Loatman.
Susannah
Loatman was a daughter of Jeremiah and Agness Loatman.
John
Lockerman ( - c. 1810) first husband of Gelico was consistently
identified as a negro in assessment records. He died
around 1810.
Nicholas
Loockerman witnessed the administration bond on the
estate of Robert Butcher, Jr.
Sarah
Lowder witnessed the will of Robert Butcher the elder.
Sally
Conselor Mall. daughter of John Conselor, in 1796 married
David Mall (d. 1813) in Salem County, New Jersey.
Mark
McCall, surveyor, witnessed the deed of Benjamin Durham
to Thomas Butcher in 1786. He made one of the resurveys
of Bloomsbury.
Deberix
Miller ( -1840) married Sarah, daughter of Elijah Conselor.
When he died in 1840, Abraham Allee and James Robinson
inventoried the estate. He mentions land bought of Benjamin
Conselor. Their children were Josiah; Elijah; Rachel,
wife of Benjamin Greenage; Enoch; Maria, wife of Benjamin
Hughes; and Robert. He mentions the children of his
deceased daughter, John and Rachel Hughes (Hewes).
Peter
Miller, Sr., was executor of the estate of Nehemiah
Handsor. He was son of John Miller, who owned the 771-acre
Maidstone tract. In his 1749 will, John Miller ordered
the land to be divided equally among his six sons. They
conveyed it to their brother Cunrod. He married Rachel,
widow of Abraham Barber, circa 1793.
Sarah
Conselor Miller wife of Deberix, was identified in the
administration of the estate of her father, Elijah Conselor,
in 1801. She was still living in 1845.
Grace
and Will Morgan witnessed the will of Robert Butcher
the younger in 1722 and the will of James Dean in 1720.
Savory
Whitman Morgan was the daughter of Samuel and Agness
Whitman. She married Stokely Morgan.
William
Morton conveyed land from Griffith Jones to Thomas Gonsela
during the seventeenth century.
Hester
Cork Munce (1841-1904) daughter of Perry Cork the younger
married James H. Munce in 1862.
James
H. Munce, husband of Hester Cork.
Robert
Munce appears first as a Kent County resident in the
1800 census listed as a free person of color. His son
married Jemima Handsor and his daughter married Joel
Durham.
Caroline
Dean Muntz daughter of Jesse Dean (1804-1868) was the
wife of Josiah Muntz.
Elizabeth
Murphey was widow of Thomas Murphey who died in 1782.
Sarah
Butcher Murphey widow of the John Butcher who died in
1761, married Thomas Murphey before February 1762.
Thomas
Murphey ( -1771), a blacksmith, and Margaret his wife,
in 1753 conveyed to Jeremiah Loatman a share in a tract
adjoining the Concord tract on the main branch of St.
Jones. Margaret was the administrator of his estate
in 1771. Sureties were James Raymond and Thomas Keith.
His estate received cash from Stephen Macey, administrator
of William Long, and from James Dean.
Thomas
Murphey ( - 1782) married John Butcher's widow, Sarah,
between February 1761 and February 1762. When he died
in 1782, his administrator was Elizabeth Murphey and
her cosigner was another Thomas Murphey. She signed
with handwriting while he used a mark. Among the accounts
were transactions involving Stephen Sparksman, Elliner
Pookham, and Ephraim Pookam.
Andrew
Naudain appraised the estate of Cornelius Handsor in
1814.
Saunders
Oakey married Johannah, the widow of Nehemiah Handsor.
He and his earlier wife Mary had a daughter Rhoda, born
October 20, 1771, who was baptised at St. George's Chapel
in Sussex County.
William
Pierce was chosen as guardian of Elizabeth Handsor,
over the objections of stepfather Saunders Oakey, who
prevailed.
Eleanor
Puckham was in Kent County as early as 1782, when she
is found on one of the accounts of the estate of Thomas
Murphey. She witnessed the will of John Durham.
Ephraim
Puckham was in Kent County as early as 1782, when he
is found on one of the accounts of the estate of Thomas
Murphey. The history of the Puckham family begins with
the baptism of John, an Indian, in 1682, and his marriage
to Joan Johnson. George Puckham was either the son or
son-in-law, or heir to one of them, in the estate settlement
of Rachel Handsor of Kent County in 1815. Hugh Durham
was the administrator.
Richard
Pulling was Robert Butcher's son-in-law.
James
Raymond (1742-1817) prepared the inventory of the estate
of Samuel Whitman in 1784. His wives were daughters
of John and Henrietta Moore. He was surety for Margaret
Murphey as administratrix for the estate of Thomas Murphey
in 1771. He was stepfather of John Allee, whose son
Abraham inherited both parts of Bloomsbury. He also
served as guardian to John's sons, Abraham, Presley,
and Jonathan. He witnessed the 1793 will of Silas Snow.
Jonathan
Raymond helped prepare the inventory of the estate of
Benjamin Loatman in 1768.
David
Rees was a witness to the will of Robert Butcher the
elder. He was a family friend of the Rodneys (Hancock
1962:37) and mentor of young Caesar.
Jeremiah
Rees sold land to James Dean.
John
Rees made the inventory of Isabel Hews with Robert Arthurs.
William
Rees was one of the sureties on the administration bond
of John Loatman.
Letitia
Dean Ridgway was a daughter of Jesse Dean (1804-1868)
and wife of Slayter Ridgway.
Brinckle
Roe witnessed the deed of Benjamin Durham to Thomas
Butcher in 1786.
Benjamin
Sammons was the father of Sarah, who married the younger
Peregrine Handsor.
William
Sappington (1721-1767) married the widow Agness Loatman
around 1761-1763. He probably was the son of Nathaniel
Sappington II, born in 1721 at their home in Cecil County,
near the present Warwick. In 1742, he witnessed the
will of Ann Day in Kent County, Maryland. He died in
1767 at Bloomsbury.
John
Saunders ( - 1824) Was tenant of Jesse Dean. His widow
Ann renounced her right to administer the estate.
John
Saunders in 1892 provided press information about the
Indian community and about his early career, which included
a visit to Lenape people in the vicinity of Peru, Indiana.
His wife, Martha, was a daughter of Jesse Dean (1804-1868).
He was one of the first members of the Cheswold community
to publicly assert Indian ancestry.
Martha
Dean Saunders daughter of Jesse Dean, was the wife of
John.
Simon
Sherman was surety for Thomas Carney when he administered
the estate of Rachel Sisco.
Silas
Snow ( - 1793) was one of the executors of the last
will and testament of Samuel Whitman in 1783 and was
named as guardian in the will.
Daniel
Songo was mentioned in the estate accounts of John Durham's
estate in 1788. The Songo family were later allied by
marriage to Durham's descendants.
William
Songo was mentioned in the estate accounts of John Durham's
estate in 1788.
Stephen
Sparksman was in Kent County as early as 1782, when
he is found on one of the accounts of the estate of
Thomas Murphey and on the assessment. He was listed
as a mulatto in the 1800 census. The surname is known
among Indian remnant populations in New Jersey.
James
Sterling Joined John Durham in a purchase of 692 acres
in 1754, and in 1776 appraised the estate of John Durham,
Jr. In 1767 he was commissioned with Thomas Tilton to
review the boundaries of Hillyards Adventure, adjacent
to Bloomsbury.
Elizabeth
Loatman Steward (Howard?) was daughter of John Loatman
and sister of Jeremiah Loatman. When she conveyed her
share of New Years Chance to Thomas Murphey, she was
married to George Howard. She is also described as being
married to George Steward, who may be the same person.
Asa
Street married Rebecca, daughter of Isaiah Durham, in
1811.
Rebecca
Durham Street daughter of Maria and Isaiah (d. 1801),
married Asa Street in 1811.
Robert
Thompson helped prepare the inventory of the estate
of Thomas LaCount in 1796.
Thomas
Tilton was one of the commissioners appointed by Orphans
Court to evaluate John Allee's share of Bloomsbury in
1787. He died before the report was completed in 1791.
John
and Ann Tilton were witnesses to the will of Robert
Butcher the elder.
John
Torbert was a neighbor who appraised Sarah Hansor's
estate in 1771 with William Corse.
John
Vangaskin took the inventory of the estate of Benjamin
Loatman in 1768. His daughter was married to Thomas
Cutler, the tenant on Bloomsbury.
Cornelius
Van Stavoren was a witness of the will of Charles Francisco,
who died in 1798.
William
Van Stavoren ( - 1810) asked to be relieved of his bond
for administration of the estate of Isaiah Durham because
the widow had married John Sisco, a mulatto. His wife
was Sarah Snow Morgan, former widow of David Morgan
and daughter of Joseph Snow. Joseph Farrow and Robert
Denney married her sisters. He was mentioned in the
1796 account of the estate of Silas Snow.
Benjamin
Wells, a blacksmith, bought part of Jolley's Neck from
Cornelius Handsor in 1773.
Jonathan
Whitman was the son of Samuel and Agness Whitman.
Agness
Loatman Sappington Whitman married, in succession, Jeremiah
Loatman, William Sappington, and Samuel Whitman.
Samuel
Whitman ( -1783) of Little Creek Hundred was the third
husband of Agness, with whom he had helped settle the
estates of her earlier husbands, Jeremiah Loatman and
William Sappington. With Agness he had a son Jonathan
and a daughter Savory. Witnesses to his 1776 will were
Thomas Butcher, Jehu Gray, and his stepdaughter Elizabeth
Loatman.
Elizabeth
Durham Williams was a daughter of Elisha Durham who
died in 1864 and his wife Hester Conselor. She was the
wife of Baynham Williams of New Jersey.
Hannah
Durham Williams was a daughter of Daniel Durham who
died in 1801. At about that time she married Williams.
Hester
Wiltbank (Saunders) died in 1824, and Elizabeth Wiltbank
was her administrator.
James
Wood married Rhoda Handsor, daughter of William Handsor.
Rhoda
Handsor Wood daughter of William and Sarah Handsor,
assigned her one-seventh share of his estate to Gabriel
Harmon. She was born between 1756 and 1769. She married
James Wood.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
References
&nbsp;
Andrzejewski,
Anna V.
1995 Moody - Clayton House, in Threatened Resources
Documented in Delaware, 1994-1995. University of Delaware
Center for Historic Architecture and Engineering.
Beers,
D. G.
1968 New Topographical Atlas of the State of Delaware.
Pomeroy and Beers, Philadelphia.
Bendler,
Bruce
1993 Securing One of the Blessings of Liberty: Black
Families in Lower New Castle County, 1790-1850. Delaware
History XXV:4 (Fall-Winter) 237-253.
Berry,
Brewton
1963 Almost White. Collier Books, New York.
Blakey,
Michael L.
1988 Social Policy, Economics and Demographic Change
in Nanticoke-Moor Ethnohistory. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 75: 493-502.
Breen,
T. H., and Stephen Innes
1980 "Myne Owne Ground:" Race and Freedom on Virginia's
Eastern Shore, 1640-1676. Oxford University Press.
Cissna,
Paul Byron
1986 The Piscataway Indians of Southern Maryland: an
ethnohistory from pre-European contact to the present.
Ph.D dissertation, The American University.
Davidson,
Thomas E.
1991 Free Blacks on the Lower Eastern Shore of Maryland:
The Colonial Period - 1662 to 1775. Maryland Historical
Trust Manuscript Series 42.
Deal,
Douglas
1988 A Constricted World: Free Blacks on Virginia's
Eastern Shore, 1680-1750, in Carr, Morgan, and Russo,
Colonial Chesapeake Society, pages 275-305, University
of North Carolina Press.
Deal,
Douglas
1993 Race and Class in Colonial Virginia: Indians, Englishmen
and Africans on the Eastern Shore During the Seventeenth
Century. Garland Publishing Company, New York.
DeMarce,
Virginia Easley
1992 "Very Slitly Mixt": Tri-racial isolate families
of the Upper South: A genealogical study. National Genealogical
Society Quarterly, vol. 80, no. 1 (March), 36-56.
DeMarce,
Virginia Easley
1993 Looking at Legends. Lumbee and Melungeon: Applied
genealogy and the origins of tri-racial isolate settlements.
National Genealogical Society Quarterly, vol. 81, no.
1 (March), 24-45.
Fisher,
George Purnell
1895 The So-Called Moors of Delaware. A sketch written
by George P. Fisher which appeared as a communication
and was published in the Milford, Del., Sherlad, under
date of June 15, 1895. Reprinted by the Public Archives
Commission of Delaware, 1929.
Grettler,
David J.,
George L. Miller, Keith Doms, Brian Seidel, Macon Coleman,
and Jay F. Custer 1995 Landowner and tenant opportunity
in seventeenth century Central Delaware: Final archeological
investigations at the Richard Whitehart (7K-C-203C)
and John Powell (7K-C-203H) plantations, State Route
1 Corridor, Kent County, Delaware. Delaware Department
of Transportation Archeology Series 127.
Hancock,
Harold Bell
1974 The indenture system in Delaware, 1681-1921. Delaware
History XVI:1 (April),47-59.
Heite,
Edward F., with Cara Lee Blume
1993 A Community on McKee Road. Delaware Department
of Transportation Archeological Series 109.
Heite,
Louise B., and Edward F. Heite
1985 Fork Branch / duPont Station Community Archeological
investigations on Denney's Road, Dover, Kent County,
Delaware. Delaware Department of Transportation Archeology
Series 37.
Horle,
Craig W., editor
1991 Records of the Courts of Sussex County Delaware
1677-1710. 2 volumes. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hurley,
Gail A.
1979 (1980) A tribute to Turkey Tayac. Maryland Archeology
XVI, no. 1.
Kennedy, N. Brent
1994 The Melungeons: the resurrection of a proud people.
Mercer University Press.
Kraft,
Herbert C., editor
1984 The Lenape Indian: a symposium. Seton Hall University.
Laws
of the State of Delaware. 2 volumes. Published by Authority.
Printed by Samuel and 1797 John Adams, New Castle.
Linn,
John Blair, Secretary of State
1879 Charter to William Penn, and Laws of the Province
of Pennsylvania, passed between the years 1682 and 1700
... State Printer, Harrisburg.
Macdonald,
Betty Harrington
1992 Further response to Delaware Moors (Vol 5 No 4).
Delaware Genealogical Society Journal 6(3):63-64.
Minutes
of the House of Representatives of the Government of
the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex upon Delaware
at sessions held at New Castle in the years 1765 - 1766
- 1767 - 1768 - 1769 - 1770.
Published by George Read and Thomas McKean, Esquires,
by order of the Assembly. Reprinted for Public Archives
Commission of Delaware 1931.
Nanticoke-Lenape
Tribal Council
1996 16th Annual Powwow. Salem, New Jersey.
Pollitzer,
William S.
1972 The physical anthropology and genetics of marginal
people of the Southeastern United States. American Anthropologist,
vol. 74 (June): 719-734.
Porter,
Frank W., editor
1986 Strategies for Survival. Greenwood Press, New York.
Roth,
Hal
1997 You can't never get to Puckum. Nanticoke Books,
Vienna, Maryland.
Rountree,
Helen C.
1972a Being an Indian in Virginia: four centuries in
limbo. The Chesopiean X, no. 1 (February).
Rountree,
Helen C.
1972b Powhatan's descendants in the Modern World: Community
studies of the two Virginia Indian reservations, with
notes on five non-reservation enclaves. The Chesopiean
X, no. 3 (June).
Rountree,
Helen C.
1989 The Powhatan Indians of Virginia: Their Traditional
Culture. University of Oklahoma Press.
Rountree,
Helen C.
1990 Pocahontas's People. University of Oklahoma Press.
First paperback edition 1996.
Rountree,
Helen, and Thomas E. Davidson
1997 Eastern Shore Indians of Virginia and Maryland.
University Press of Virginia.
Scharf,
J. Thomas
1888 History of Delaware. L. J. Richards, Philadelphia.
Segall,
Albert Elliott
1976 You Sort; Wesort, MA Thesis, George Washington
University.
Shearer,
Carolyn, and Judy Schaeffer
1993 Okey Family in America. Typescript on file, Delaware
Public Archives.
Sider,
Gerald M.
1993 Lumbee Indian Histories: Race, ethnicity, and Indian
identity in the southern United States. Cambridge University
Press.
Walsh,
Lorena S.
1988 Community Networks in the Early Chesapeake, in
Lois Green Carr, Philip D. Morgan and Jean B. Russo,
editors, Colonial Chesapeake Society, University of
North Carolina Press.
Weslager,
C. A.
1943 Delaware's Forgotten Folk. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia.
Whitelaw,
Ralph T.
1968 Virginia's Eastern Shore: A history of Northampton
and Accomack counties. Peter Smith, Gloucester, Mass.
Witthoft,
John
1994 The direct historical approach to Lenape archaeology.
Pennsylvania Archeologist volume 64, number 1 (March),
pages 65-69.
Primary
Documentation
Delaware Archives
Census returns microfilms
Court dockets and loose papers
Laws of Delaware and legislative minutes
Kent County Recorder of Deeds
Deed Books
Plot Books
Kent County Register of Wills
Will Books
Loose probate files
Historical Society of Pennsylvania
Muster roll of John McClughan in the pay of the Delaware
Government, May 22, 1758.
The "Invisible" Indians of Central Delaware, Edward
Heite and Cara Lee Blume
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
MAIN
MENU
&nbsp;
EMAIL
US
&nbsp;
KUSKARAWOAK & MITSAWOKETT
&quot;The
History and Genealogy of the
Native American Isolate Communities
of Kent County, Delaware, and
Surrounding Areas on the Delmarva Peninsula
and Southern New Jersey&quot;
&nbsp;
Copyright 1997-
var today = new Date()
var year = today.getFullYear()
document.write(year)
All rights reserved.
Not to be used for commercial purposes.
&nbsp;